<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      VI. THE PALE CRIMINAL.
    </h2>
    <p>
      Ye do not mean to slay, ye judges and sacrificers, until the animal hath
      bowed its head? Lo! the pale criminal hath bowed his head: out of his eye
      speaketh the great contempt.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Mine ego is something which is to be surpassed: mine ego is to me the
      great contempt of man”: so speaketh it out of that eye.
    </p>
    <p>
      When he judged himself—that was his supreme moment; let not the
      exalted one relapse again into his low estate!
    </p>
    <p>
      There is no salvation for him who thus suffereth from himself, unless it
      be speedy death.
    </p>
    <p>
      Your slaying, ye judges, shall be pity, and not revenge; and in that ye
      slay, see to it that ye yourselves justify life!
    </p>
    <p>
      It is not enough that ye should reconcile with him whom ye slay. Let your
      sorrow be love to the Superman: thus will ye justify your own survival!
    </p>
    <p>
      “Enemy” shall ye say but not “villain,” “invalid” shall ye say but not
      “wretch,” “fool” shall ye say but not “sinner.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And thou, red judge, if thou would say audibly all thou hast done in
      thought, then would every one cry: “Away with the nastiness and the
      virulent reptile!”
     </p>
    <p>
      But one thing is the thought, another thing is the deed, and another thing
      is the idea of the deed. The wheel of causality doth not roll between
      them.
    </p>
    <p>
      An idea made this pale man pale. Adequate was he for his deed when he did
      it, but the idea of it, he could not endure when it was done.
    </p>
    <p>
      Evermore did he now see himself as the doer of one deed. Madness, I call
      this: the exception reversed itself to the rule in him.
    </p>
    <p>
      The streak of chalk bewitcheth the hen; the stroke he struck bewitched his
      weak reason. Madness AFTER the deed, I call this.
    </p>
    <p>
      Hearken, ye judges! There is another madness besides, and it is BEFORE the
      deed. Ah! ye have not gone deep enough into this soul!
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus speaketh the red judge: “Why did this criminal commit murder? He
      meant to rob.” I tell you, however, that his soul wanted blood, not booty:
      he thirsted for the happiness of the knife!
    </p>
    <p>
      But his weak reason understood not this madness, and it persuaded him.
      “What matter about blood!” it said; “wishest thou not, at least, to make
      booty thereby? Or take revenge?”
     </p>
    <p>
      And he hearkened unto his weak reason: like lead lay its words upon him—thereupon
      he robbed when he murdered. He did not mean to be ashamed of his madness.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now once more lieth the lead of his guilt upon him, and once more is
      his weak reason so benumbed, so paralysed, and so dull.
    </p>
    <p>
      Could he only shake his head, then would his burden roll off; but who
      shaketh that head?
    </p>
    <p>
      What is this man? A mass of diseases that reach out into the world through
      the spirit; there they want to get their prey.
    </p>
    <p>
      What is this man? A coil of wild serpents that are seldom at peace among
      themselves—so they go forth apart and seek prey in the world.
    </p>
    <p>
      Look at that poor body! What it suffered and craved, the poor soul
      interpreted to itself—it interpreted it as murderous desire, and
      eagerness for the happiness of the knife.
    </p>
    <p>
      Him who now turneth sick, the evil overtaketh which is now the evil: he
      seeketh to cause pain with that which causeth him pain. But there have
      been other ages, and another evil and good.
    </p>
    <p>
      Once was doubt evil, and the will to Self. Then the invalid became a
      heretic or sorcerer; as heretic or sorcerer he suffered, and sought to
      cause suffering.
    </p>
    <p>
      But this will not enter your ears; it hurteth your good people, ye tell
      me. But what doth it matter to me about your good people!
    </p>
    <p>
      Many things in your good people cause me disgust, and verily, not their
      evil. I would that they had a madness by which they succumbed, like this
      pale criminal!
    </p>
    <p>
      Verily, I would that their madness were called truth, or fidelity, or
      justice: but they have their virtue in order to live long, and in wretched
      self-complacency.
    </p>
    <p>
      I am a railing alongside the torrent; whoever is able to grasp me may
      grasp me! Your crutch, however, I am not.—
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus spake Zarathustra.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0012" id="link2H_4_0012">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
