<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      VIII. THE TREE ON THE HILL.
    </h2>
    <p>
      Zarathustra’s eye had perceived that a certain youth avoided him. And as
      he walked alone one evening over the hills surrounding the town called
      “The Pied Cow,” behold, there found he the youth sitting leaning against a
      tree, and gazing with wearied look into the valley. Zarathustra thereupon
      laid hold of the tree beside which the youth sat, and spake thus:
    </p>
    <p>
      “If I wished to shake this tree with my hands, I should not be able to do
      so.
    </p>
    <p>
      But the wind, which we see not, troubleth and bendeth it as it listeth. We
      are sorest bent and troubled by invisible hands.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Thereupon the youth arose disconcerted, and said: “I hear Zarathustra, and
      just now was I thinking of him!” Zarathustra answered:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Why art thou frightened on that account?—But it is the same with
      man as with the tree.
    </p>
    <p>
      The more he seeketh to rise into the height and light, the more vigorously
      do his roots struggle earthward, downward, into the dark and deep—into
      the evil.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yea, into the evil!” cried the youth. “How is it possible that thou hast
      discovered my soul?”
     </p>
    <p>
      Zarathustra smiled, and said: “Many a soul one will never discover, unless
      one first invent it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Yea, into the evil!” cried the youth once more.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Thou saidst the truth, Zarathustra. I trust myself no longer since I
      sought to rise into the height, and nobody trusteth me any longer; how
      doth that happen?
    </p>
    <p>
      I change too quickly: my to-day refuteth my yesterday. I often overleap
      the steps when I clamber; for so doing, none of the steps pardons me.
    </p>
    <p>
      When aloft, I find myself always alone. No one speaketh unto me; the frost
      of solitude maketh me tremble. What do I seek on the height?
    </p>
    <p>
      My contempt and my longing increase together; the higher I clamber, the
      more do I despise him who clambereth. What doth he seek on the height?
    </p>
    <p>
      How ashamed I am of my clambering and stumbling! How I mock at my violent
      panting! How I hate him who flieth! How tired I am on the height!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Here the youth was silent. And Zarathustra contemplated the tree beside
      which they stood, and spake thus:
    </p>
    <p>
      “This tree standeth lonely here on the hills; it hath grown up high above
      man and beast.
    </p>
    <p>
      And if it wanted to speak, it would have none who could understand it: so
      high hath it grown.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now it waiteth and waiteth,—for what doth it wait? It dwelleth too
      close to the seat of the clouds; it waiteth perhaps for the first
      lightning?”
     </p>
    <p>
      When Zarathustra had said this, the youth called out with violent
      gestures: “Yea, Zarathustra, thou speakest the truth. My destruction I
      longed for, when I desired to be on the height, and thou art the lightning
      for which I waited! Lo! what have I been since thou hast appeared amongst
      us? It is mine envy of thee that hath destroyed me!”—Thus spake the
      youth, and wept bitterly. Zarathustra, however, put his arm about him, and
      led the youth away with him.
    </p>
    <p>
      And when they had walked a while together, Zarathustra began to speak
      thus:
    </p>
    <p>
      It rendeth my heart. Better than thy words express it, thine eyes tell me
      all thy danger.
    </p>
    <p>
      As yet thou art not free; thou still SEEKEST freedom. Too unslept hath thy
      seeking made thee, and too wakeful.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the open height wouldst thou be; for the stars thirsteth thy soul. But
      thy bad impulses also thirst for freedom.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thy wild dogs want liberty; they bark for joy in their cellar when thy
      spirit endeavoureth to open all prison doors.
    </p>
    <p>
      Still art thou a prisoner—it seemeth to me—who deviseth
      liberty for himself: ah! sharp becometh the soul of such prisoners, but
      also deceitful and wicked.
    </p>
    <p>
      To purify himself, is still necessary for the freedman of the spirit. Much
      of the prison and the mould still remaineth in him: pure hath his eye
      still to become.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yea, I know thy danger. But by my love and hope I conjure thee: cast not
      thy love and hope away!
    </p>
    <p>
      Noble thou feelest thyself still, and noble others also feel thee still,
      though they bear thee a grudge and cast evil looks. Know this, that to
      everybody a noble one standeth in the way.
    </p>
    <p>
      Also to the good, a noble one standeth in the way: and even when they call
      him a good man, they want thereby to put him aside.
    </p>
    <p>
      The new, would the noble man create, and a new virtue. The old, wanteth
      the good man, and that the old should be conserved.
    </p>
    <p>
      But it is not the danger of the noble man to turn a good man, but lest he
      should become a blusterer, a scoffer, or a destroyer.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah! I have known noble ones who lost their highest hope. And then they
      disparaged all high hopes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then lived they shamelessly in temporary pleasures, and beyond the day had
      hardly an aim.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Spirit is also voluptuousness,”—said they. Then broke the wings of
      their spirit; and now it creepeth about, and defileth where it gnaweth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Once they thought of becoming heroes; but sensualists are they now. A
      trouble and a terror is the hero to them.
    </p>
    <p>
      But by my love and hope I conjure thee: cast not away the hero in thy
      soul! Maintain holy thy highest hope!—
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus spake Zarathustra.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0014" id="link2H_4_0014">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
