<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LXI: The Honey Sacrifice</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-61" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Honey Sacrifice</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>—And again passed moons and years over Zarathustra’s soul, and he heeded it not; his hair, however, became white. One day when he sat on a stone in front of his cave, and gazed calmly into the distance⁠—one there gazeth out on the sea, and away beyond sinuous abysses⁠—then went his animals thoughtfully round about him, and at last set themselves in front of him.</p>
			<p>“O Zarathustra,” said they, “gazest thou out perhaps for thy happiness?”⁠—“Of what account is my happiness!” answered he, “I have long ceased to strive any more for happiness, I strive for my work.”⁠—“O Zarathustra,” said the animals once more, “that sayest thou as one who hath overmuch of good things. Liest thou not in a sky-blue lake of happiness?”⁠—“Ye wags,” answered Zarathustra, and smiled, “how well did ye choose the simile! But ye know also that my happiness is heavy, and not like a fluid wave of water: it presseth me and will not leave me, and is like molten pitch.”⁠—</p>
			<p>Then went his animals again thoughtfully around him, and placed themselves once more in front of him. “O Zarathustra,” said they, “it is consequently <em>for that reason</em> that thou thyself always becometh yellower and darker, although thy hair looketh white and flaxen? Lo, thou sittest in thy pitch!”⁠—“What do ye say, mine animals?” said Zarathustra, laughing; “verily I reviled when I spake of pitch. As it happeneth with me, so is it with all fruits that turn ripe. It is the <em>honey</em> in my veins that maketh my blood thicker, and also my soul stiller.”⁠—“So will it be, O Zarathustra,” answered his animals, and pressed up to him; “but wilt thou not today ascend a high mountain? The air is pure, and today one seeth more of the world than ever.”⁠—“Yea, mine animals,” answered he, “ye counsel admirably and according to my heart: I will today ascend a high mountain! But see that honey is there ready to hand, yellow, white, good, ice-cool, golden-comb-honey. For know that when aloft I will make the honey-sacrifice.”⁠—</p>
			<p>When Zarathustra, however, was aloft on the summit, he sent his animals home that had accompanied him, and found that he was now alone:⁠—then he laughed from the bottom of his heart, looked around him, and spake thus:</p>
			<p>That I spake of sacrifices and honey-sacrifices, it was merely a ruse in talking and verily, a useful folly! Here aloft can I now speak freer than in front of mountain-caves and anchorites’ domestic animals.</p>
			<p>What to sacrifice! I squander what is given me, a squanderer with a thousand hands: how could I call that⁠—sacrificing?</p>
			<p>And when I desired honey I only desired bait, and sweet mucus and mucilage, for which even the mouths of growling bears, and strange, sulky, evil birds, water:</p>
			<p>—The best bait, as huntsmen and fishermen require it. For if the world be as a gloomy forest of animals, and a pleasure-ground for all wild huntsmen, it seemeth to me rather⁠—and preferably⁠—a fathomless, rich sea;</p>
			<p>—A sea full of many-hued fishes and crabs, for which even the Gods might long, and might be tempted to become fishers in it, and casters of nets⁠—so rich is the world in wonderful things, great and small!</p>
			<p>Especially the human world, the human sea:⁠—towards <em>it</em> do I now throw out my golden angle-rod and say: Open up, thou human abyss!</p>
			<p>Open up, and throw unto me thy fish and shining crabs! With my best bait shall I allure to myself today the strangest human fish!</p>
			<p>—My happiness itself do I throw out into all places far and wide ’twixt orient, noontide, and occident, to see if many human fish will not learn to hug and tug at my happiness;⁠—</p>
			<p>Until, biting at my sharp hidden hooks, they have to come up unto <em>my</em> height, the motleyest abyss-groundlings, to the wickedest of all fishers of men.</p>
			<p>For <em>this</em> am I from the heart and from the beginning⁠—drawing, hither-drawing, upward-drawing, upbringing; a drawer, a trainer, a training-master, who not in vain counselled himself once on a time: “Become what thou art!”</p>
			<p>Thus may men now come <em>up</em> to me; for as yet do I await the signs that it is time for my down-going; as yet do I not myself go down, as I must do, amongst men.</p>
			<p>Therefore do I here wait, crafty and scornful upon high mountains, no impatient one, no patient one; rather one who hath even unlearnt patience⁠—because he no longer “suffereth.”</p>
			<p>For my fate giveth me time: it hath forgotten me perhaps? Or doth it sit behind a big stone and catch flies?</p>
			<p>And verily, I am well-disposed to mine eternal fate, because it doth not hound and hurry me, but leaveth me time for merriment and mischief; so that I have today ascended this high mountain to catch fish.</p>
			<p>Did ever anyone catch fish upon high mountains? And though it be a folly what I here seek and do, it is better so than that down below I should become solemn with waiting, and green and yellow⁠—</p>
			<p>—A posturing wrath-snorter with waiting, a holy howl-storm from the mountains, an impatient one that shouteth down into the valleys: “Hearken, else I will scourge you with the scourge of God!”</p>
			<p>Not that I would have a grudge against such wrathful ones on that account: they are well enough for laughter to me! Impatient must they now be, those big alarm-drums, which find a voice now or never!</p>
			<p>Myself, however, and my fate⁠—we do not talk to the Present, neither do we talk to the Never: for talking we have patience and time and more than time. For one day must it yet come, and may not pass by.</p>
			<p>What must one day come and may not pass by? Our great Hazar, that is to say, our great, remote human-kingdom, the Zarathustra-kingdom of a thousand years⁠⸺</p>
			<p>How remote may such “remoteness” be? What doth it concern me? But on that account it is none the less sure unto me⁠—, with both feet stand I secure on this ground;</p>
			<p>—On an eternal ground, on hard primary rock, on this highest, hardest, primary mountain-ridge, unto which all winds come, as unto the storm-parting, asking Where? and Whence? and Whither?</p>
			<p>Here laugh, laugh, my hearty, healthy wickedness! From high mountains cast down thy glittering scorn-laughter! Allure for me with thy glittering the finest human fish!</p>
			<p>And whatever belongeth unto <em>me</em> in all seas, my in-and-for-me in all things⁠—fish <em>that</em> out for me, bring <em>that</em> up to me: for that do I wait, the wickedest of all fish-catchers.</p>
			<p>Out! out! my fishing-hook! In and down, thou bait of my happiness! Drip thy sweetest dew, thou honey of my heart! Bite, my fishing-hook, into the belly of all black affliction!</p>
			<p>Look out, look out, mine eye! Oh, how many seas round about me, what dawning human futures! And above me⁠—what rosy red stillness! What unclouded silence!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
