<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Rabble</h2>
			<p>Life is a well of delight; but where the rabble also drink, there all fountains are poisoned.</p>
			<p>To everything cleanly am I well disposed; but I hate to see the grinning mouths and the thirst of the unclean.</p>
			<p>They cast their eye down into the fountain: and now glanceth up to me their odious smile out of the fountain.</p>
			<p>The holy water have they poisoned with their lustfulness; and when they called their filthy dreams delight, then poisoned they also the words.</p>
			<p>Indignant becometh the flame when they put their damp hearts to the fire; the spirit itself bubbleth and smoketh when the rabble approach the fire.</p>
			<p>Mawkish and over-mellow becometh the fruit in their hands: unsteady, and withered at the top, doth their look make the fruit-tree.</p>
			<p>And many a one who hath turned away from life, hath only turned away from the rabble: he hated to share with them fountain, flame, and fruit.</p>
			<p>And many a one who hath gone into the wilderness and suffered thirst with beasts of prey, disliked only to sit at the cistern with filthy camel-drivers.</p>
			<p>And many a one who hath come along as a destroyer, and as a hailstorm to all cornfields, wanted merely to put his foot into the jaws of the rabble, and thus stop their throat.</p>
			<p>And it is not the mouthful which hath most choked me, to know that life itself requireth enmity and death and torture-crosses:⁠—</p>
			<p>But I asked once, and suffocated almost with my question: What? is the rabble also <em>necessary</em> for life?</p>
			<p>Are poisoned fountains necessary, and stinking fires, and filthy dreams, and maggots in the bread of life?</p>
			<p>Not my hatred, but my loathing, gnawed hungrily at my life! Ah, ofttimes became I weary of spirit, when I found even the rabble spiritual!</p>
			<p>And on the rulers turned I my back, when I saw what they now call ruling: to traffic and bargain for power⁠—with the rabble!</p>
			<p>Amongst peoples of a strange language did I dwell, with stopped ears: so that the language of their trafficking might remain strange unto me, and their bargaining for power.</p>
			<p>And holding my nose, I went morosely through all yesterdays and to-days: verily, badly smell all yesterdays and to-days of the scribbling rabble!</p>
			<p>Like a cripple become deaf, and blind, and dumb⁠—thus have I lived long; that I might not live with the power-rabble, the scribe-rabble, and the pleasure-rabble.</p>
			<p>Toilsomely did my spirit mount stairs, and cautiously; alms of delight were its refreshment; on the staff did life creep along with the blind one.</p>
			<p>What hath happened unto me? How have I freed myself from loathing? Who hath rejuvenated mine eye? How have I flown to the height where no rabble any longer sit at the wells?</p>
			<p>Did my loathing itself create for me wings and fountain-divining powers? Verily, to the loftiest height had I to fly, to find again the well of delight!</p>
			<p>Oh, I have found it, my brethren! Here on the loftiest height bubbleth up for me the well of delight! And there is a life at whose waters none of the rabble drink with me!</p>
			<p>Almost too violently dost thou flow for me, thou fountain of delight! And often emptiest thou the goblet again, in wanting to fill it!</p>
			<p>And yet must I learn to approach thee more modestly: far too violently doth my heart still flow towards thee:⁠—</p>
			<p>My heart on which my summer burneth, my short, hot, melancholy, over-happy summer: how my summer heart longeth for thy coolness!</p>
			<p>Past, the lingering distress of my spring! Past, the wickedness of my snowflakes in June! Summer have I become entirely, and summer-noontide!</p>
			<p>A summer on the loftiest height, with cold fountains and blissful stillness: oh, come, my friends, that the stillness may become more blissful!</p>
			<p>For this is <em>our</em> height and our home: too high and steep do we here dwell for all uncleanly ones and their thirst.</p>
			<p>Cast but your pure eyes into the well of my delight, my friends! How could it become turbid thereby! It shall laugh back to you with <em>its</em> purity.</p>
			<p>On the tree of the future build we our nest; eagles shall bring us lone ones food in their beaks!</p>
			<p>Verily, no food of which the impure could be fellow-partakers! Fire, would they think they devoured, and burn their mouths!</p>
			<p>Verily, no abodes do we here keep ready for the impure! An ice-cave to their bodies would our happiness be, and to their spirits!</p>
			<p>And as strong winds will we live above them, neighbours to the eagles, neighbours to the snow, neighbours to the sun: thus live the strong winds.</p>
			<p>And like a wind will I one day blow amongst them, and with my spirit, take the breath from their spirit: thus willeth my future.</p>
			<p>Verily, a strong wind is Zarathustra to all low places; and this counsel counselleth he to his enemies, and to whatever spitteth and speweth: “Take care not to spit <em>against</em> the wind!”⁠—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
