<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I: The Three Metamorphoses</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Three Metamorphoses</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Three metamorphoses of the spirit do I designate to you: how the spirit becometh a camel, the camel a lion, and the lion at last a child.</p>
			<p>Many heavy things are there for the spirit, the strong load-bearing spirit in which reverence dwelleth: for the heavy and the heaviest longeth its strength.</p>
			<p>What is heavy? so asketh the load-bearing spirit; then kneeleth it down like the camel, and wanteth to be well laden.</p>
			<p>What is the heaviest thing, ye heroes? asketh the load-bearing spirit, that I may take it upon me and rejoice in my strength.</p>
			<p>Is it not this: To humiliate oneself in order to mortify one’s pride? To exhibit one’s folly in order to mock at one’s wisdom?</p>
			<p>Or is it this: To desert our cause when it celebrateth its triumph? To ascend high mountains to tempt the tempter?</p>
			<p>Or is it this: To feed on the acorns and grass of knowledge, and for the sake of truth to suffer hunger of soul?</p>
			<p>Or is it this: To be sick and dismiss comforters, and make friends of the deaf, who never hear thy requests?</p>
			<p>Or is it this: To go into foul water when it is the water of truth, and not disclaim cold frogs and hot toads?</p>
			<p>Or is it this: To love those who despise us, and give one’s hand to the phantom when it is going to frighten us?</p>
			<p>All these heaviest things the load-bearing spirit taketh upon itself: and like the camel, which, when laden, hasteneth into the wilderness, so hasteneth the spirit into its wilderness.</p>
			<p>But in the loneliest wilderness happeneth the second metamorphosis: here the spirit becometh a lion; freedom will it capture, and lordship in its own wilderness.</p>
			<p>Its last Lord it here seeketh: hostile will it be to him, and to its last God; for victory will it struggle with the great dragon.</p>
			<p>What is the great dragon which the spirit is no longer inclined to call Lord and God? “Thou-shalt,” is the great dragon called. But the spirit of the lion saith, “I will.”</p>
			<p>“Thou-shalt,” lieth in its path, sparkling with gold⁠—a scale-covered beast; and on every scale glittereth golden, “Thou shalt!”</p>
			<p>The values of a thousand years glitter on those scales, and thus speaketh the mightiest of all dragons: “All the values of things⁠—glitter on me.</p>
			<p>“All values have already been created, and all created values⁠—do I represent. Verily, there shall be no ‘I will’ any more.” Thus speaketh the dragon.</p>
			<p>My brethren, wherefore is there need of the lion in the spirit? Why sufficeth not the beast of burden, which renounceth and is reverent?</p>
			<p>To create new values⁠—that, even the lion cannot yet accomplish: but to create itself freedom for new creating⁠—that can the might of the lion do.</p>
			<p>To create itself freedom, and give a holy Nay even unto duty: for that, my brethren, there is need of the lion.</p>
			<p>To assume the right to new values⁠—that is the most formidable assumption for a load-bearing and reverent spirit. Verily, unto such a spirit it is preying, and the work of a beast of prey.</p>
			<p>As its holiest, it once loved “Thou-shalt”: now is it forced to find illusion and arbitrariness even in the holiest things, that it may capture freedom from its love: the lion is needed for this capture.</p>
			<p>But tell me, my brethren, what the child can do, which even the lion could not do? Why hath the preying lion still to become a child?</p>
			<p>Innocence is the child, and forgetfulness, a new beginning, a game, a self-rolling wheel, a first movement, a holy Yea.</p>
			<p>Aye, for the game of creating, my brethren, there is needed a holy Yea unto life: <em>its own</em> will, willeth now the spirit; <em>his own</em> world winneth the world’s outcast.</p>
			<p>Three metamorphoses of the spirit have I designated to you: how the spirit became a camel, the camel a lion, and the lion at last a child.⁠—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra. And at that time he abode in the town which is called The Pied Cow.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
