<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-29" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXIX. THE TARANTULAS.</h2>
			<p>Lo, this is the tarantula’s den! Wouldst thou see the tarantula itself? Here hangeth its web: touch this, so that it may tremble.</p>
			<p>There cometh the tarantula willingly: Welcome, tarantula! Black on thy back is thy triangle and symbol; and I know also what is in thy soul.</p>
			<p>Revenge is in thy soul: wherever thou bitest, there ariseth black scab; with revenge, thy poison maketh the soul giddy!</p>
			<p>Thus do I speak unto you in parable, ye who make the soul giddy, ye preachers of EQUALITY! Tarantulas are ye unto me, and secretly revengeful ones!</p>
			<p>But I will soon bring your hiding-places to the light: therefore do I laugh in your face my laughter of the height.</p>
			<p>Therefore do I tear at your web, that your rage may lure you out of your den of lies, and that your revenge may leap forth from behind your word “justice.”</p>
			<p>Because, FOR MAN TO BE REDEEMED FROM REVENGE—that is for me the bridge to the highest hope, and a rainbow after long storms.</p>
			<p>Otherwise, however, would the tarantulas have it. “Let it be very justice for the world to become full of the storms of our vengeance”—thus do they talk to one another.</p>
			<p>“Vengeance will we use, and insult, against all who are not like us”—thus do the tarantula-hearts pledge themselves.</p>
			<p>“And ‘Will to Equality’—that itself shall henceforth be the name of virtue; and against all that hath power will we raise an outcry!”</p>
			<p>Ye preachers of equality, the tyrant-frenzy of impotence crieth thus in you for “equality”: your most secret tyrant-longings disguise themselves thus in virtue-words!</p>
			<p>Fretted conceit and suppressed envy—perhaps your fathers’ conceit and envy: in you break they forth as flame and frenzy of vengeance.</p>
			<p>What the father hath hid cometh out in the son; and oft have I found in the son the father’s revealed secret.</p>
			<p>Inspired ones they resemble: but it is not the heart that inspireth them—but vengeance. And when they become subtle and cold, it is not spirit, but envy, that maketh them so.</p>
			<p>Their jealousy leadeth them also into thinkers’ paths; and this is the sign of their jealousy—they always go too far: so that their fatigue hath at last to go to sleep on the snow.</p>
			<p>In all their lamentations soundeth vengeance, in all their eulogies is maleficence; and being judge seemeth to them bliss.</p>
			<p>But thus do I counsel you, my friends: distrust all in whom the impulse to punish is powerful!</p>
			<p>They are people of bad race and lineage; out of their countenances peer the hangman and the sleuth-hound.</p>
			<p>Distrust all those who talk much of their justice! Verily, in their souls not only honey is lacking.</p>
			<p>And when they call themselves “the good and just,” forget not, that for them to be Pharisees, nothing is lacking but—power!</p>
			<p>My friends, I will not be mixed up and confounded with others.</p>
			<p>There are those who preach my doctrine of life, and are at the same time preachers of equality, and tarantulas.</p>
			<p>That they speak in favour of life, though they sit in their den, these poison-spiders, and withdrawn from life—is because they would thereby do injury.</p>
			<p>To those would they thereby do injury who have power at present: for with those the preaching of death is still most at home.</p>
			<p>Were it otherwise, then would the tarantulas teach otherwise: and they themselves were formerly the best world-maligners and heretic-burners.</p>
			<p>With these preachers of equality will I not be mixed up and confounded. For thus speaketh justice UNTO ME: “Men are not equal.”</p>
			<p>And neither shall they become so! What would be my love to the Superman, if I spake otherwise?</p>
			<p>On a thousand bridges and piers shall they throng to the future, and always shall there be more war and inequality among them: thus doth my great love make me speak!</p>
			<p>Inventors of figures and phantoms shall they be in their hostilities; and with those figures and phantoms shall they yet fight with each other the supreme fight!</p>
			<p>Good and evil, and rich and poor, and high and low, and all names of values: weapons shall they be, and sounding signs, that life must again and again surpass itself!</p>
			<p>Aloft will it build itself with columns and stairs—life itself: into remote distances would it gaze, and out towards blissful beauties— THEREFORE doth it require elevation!</p>
			<p>And because it requireth elevation, therefore doth it require steps, and variance of steps and climbers! To rise striveth life, and in rising to surpass itself.</p>
			<p>And just behold, my friends! Here where the tarantula’s den is, riseth aloft an ancient temple’s ruins—just behold it with enlightened eyes!</p>
			<p>Verily, he who here towered aloft his thoughts in stone, knew as well as the wisest ones about the secret of life!</p>
			<p>That there is struggle and inequality even in beauty, and war for power and supremacy: that doth he here teach us in the plainest parable.</p>
			<p>How divinely do vault and arch here contrast in the struggle: how with light and shade they strive against each other, the divinely striving ones.—</p>
			<p>Thus, steadfast and beautiful, let us also be enemies, my friends! Divinely will we strive AGAINST one another!—</p>
			<p>Alas! There hath the tarantula bit me myself, mine old enemy! Divinely steadfast and beautiful, it hath bit me on the finger!</p>
			<p>“Punishment must there be, and justice”—so thinketh it: “not gratuitously shall he here sing songs in honour of enmity!”</p>
			<p>Yea, it hath revenged itself! And alas! now will it make my soul also dizzy with revenge!</p>
			<p>That I may NOT turn dizzy, however, bind me fast, my friends, to this pillar! Rather will I be a pillar-saint than a whirl of vengeance!</p>
			<p>Verily, no cyclone or whirlwind is Zarathustra: and if he be a dancer, he is not at all a tarantula-dancer!—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
