<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVI: The Land of Culture</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">The Land of Culture</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Too far did I fly into the future: a horror seized upon me.</p>
				<p>And when I looked around me, lo! there time was my sole contemporary.</p>
				<p>Then did I fly backwards, homewards⁠—and always faster. Thus did I come unto you, ye present-day men, and into the land of culture.</p>
				<p>For the first time brought I an eye to see you, and good desire: verily, with longing in my heart did I come.</p>
				<p>But how did it turn out with me? Although so alarmed⁠—I had yet to laugh! Never did mine eye see anything so motley-coloured!</p>
				<p>I laughed and laughed, while my foot still trembled, and my heart as well. “Here forsooth, is the home of all the paintpots,”⁠—said I.</p>
				<p>With fifty patches painted on faces and limbs⁠—so sat ye there to mine astonishment, ye present-day men!</p>
				<p>And with fifty mirrors around you, which flattered your play of colours, and repeated it!</p>
				<p>Verily, ye could wear no better masks, ye present-day men, than your own faces! Who could⁠—<em>recognise</em> you!</p>
				<p>Written all over with the characters of the past, and these characters also pencilled over with new characters⁠—thus have ye concealed yourselves well from all decipherers!</p>
				<p>And though one be a trier of the reins, who still believeth that ye have reins! Out of colours ye seem to be baked, and out of glued scraps.</p>
				<p>All times and peoples gaze diverse-coloured out of your veils; all customs and beliefs speak diverse-coloured out of your gestures.</p>
				<p>He who would strip you of veils and wrappers, and paints and gestures, would just have enough left to scare the crows.</p>
				<p>Verily, I myself am the scared crow that once saw you naked, and without paint; and I flew away when the skeleton ogled at me.</p>
				<p>Rather would I be a day-labourer in the netherworld, and among the shades of the bygone!⁠—Fatter and fuller than ye, are forsooth the netherworldlings!</p>
				<p>This, yea this, is bitterness to my bowels, that I can neither endure you naked nor clothed, ye present-day men!</p>
				<p>All that is unhomelike in the future, and whatever maketh strayed birds shiver, is verily more homelike and familiar than your “reality.”</p>
				<p>For thus speak ye: “Real are we wholly, and without faith and superstition”: thus do ye plume yourselves⁠—alas! even without plumes!</p>
				<p>Indeed, how would ye be <em>able</em> to believe, ye diverse-coloured ones!⁠—ye who are pictures of all that hath ever been believed!</p>
				<p>Perambulating refutations are ye, of belief itself, and a dislocation of all thought. <em>Untrustworthy ones</em>: thus do <em>I</em> call you, ye real ones!</p>
				<p>All periods prate against one another in your spirits; and the dreams and pratings of all periods were even realer than your awakeness!</p>
				<p>Unfruitful are ye: <em>therefore</em> do ye lack belief. But he who had to create, had always his presaging dreams and astral premonitions⁠—and believed in believing!⁠—</p>
				<p>Half-open doors are ye, at which gravediggers wait. And this is <em>your</em> reality: “Everything deserveth to perish.”</p>
				<p>Alas, how ye stand there before me, ye unfruitful ones; how lean your ribs! And many of you surely have had knowledge thereof.</p>
				<p>Many a one hath said: “There hath surely a God filched something from me secretly whilst I slept? Verily, enough to make a girl for himself therefrom!</p>
				<p>“Amazing is the poverty of my ribs!” thus hath spoken many a present-day man.</p>
				<p>Yea, ye are laughable unto me, ye present-day men! And especially when ye marvel at yourselves!</p>
				<p>And woe unto me if I could not laugh at your marvelling, and had to swallow all that is repugnant in your platters!</p>
				<p>As it is, however, I will make lighter of you, since I have to carry <em>what is heavy</em>; and what matter if beetles and May-bugs also alight on my load!</p>
				<p>Verily, it shall not on that account become heavier to me! And not from you, ye present-day men, shall my great weariness arise.⁠—</p>
				<p>Ah, whither shall I now ascend with my longing! From all mountains do I look out for fatherlands and motherlands.</p>
				<p>But a home have I found nowhere: unsettled am I in all cities, and decamping at all gates.</p>
				<p>Alien to me, and a mockery, are the present-day men, to whom of late my heart impelled me; and exiled am I from fatherlands and motherlands.</p>
				<p>Thus do I love only my <em>children’s land</em>, the undiscovered in the remotest sea: for it do I bid my sails search and search.</p>
				<p>Unto my children will I make amends for being the child of my fathers: and unto all the future⁠—for <em>this</em> present-day!⁠—</p>
				<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
