<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI: Voluntary Death</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Voluntary Death</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Many die too late, and some die too early. Yet strange soundeth the precept: “Die at the right time!</p>
				<p>Die at the right time: so teacheth Zarathustra.</p>
				<p>To be sure, he who never liveth at the right time, how could he ever die at the right time? Would that he might never be born!⁠—Thus do I advise the superfluous ones.</p>
				<p>But even the superfluous ones make much ado about their death, and even the hollowest nut wanteth to be cracked.</p>
				<p>Every one regardeth dying as a great matter: but as yet death is not a festival. Not yet have people learned to inaugurate the finest festivals.</p>
				<p>The consummating death I show unto you, which becometh a stimulus and promise to the living.</p>
				<p>His death, dieth the consummating one triumphantly, surrounded by hoping and promising ones.</p>
				<p>Thus should one learn to die; and there should be no festival at which such a dying one doth not consecrate the oaths of the living!</p>
				<p>Thus to die is best; the next best, however, is to die in battle, and sacrifice a great soul.</p>
				<p>But to the fighter equally hateful as to the victor, is your grinning death which stealeth nigh like a thief⁠—and yet cometh as master.</p>
				<p>My death, praise I unto you, the voluntary death, which cometh unto me because <em>I</em> want it.</p>
				<p>And when shall I want it?⁠—He that hath a goal and an heir, wanteth death at the right time for the goal and the heir.</p>
				<p>And out of reverence for the goal and the heir, he will hang up no more withered wreaths in the sanctuary of life.</p>
				<p>Verily, not the rope-makers will I resemble: they lengthen out their cord, and thereby go ever backward.</p>
				<p>Many a one, also, waxeth too old for his truths and triumphs; a toothless mouth hath no longer the right to every truth.</p>
				<p>And whoever wanteth to have fame, must take leave of honour betimes, and practise the difficult art of⁠—going at the right time.</p>
				<p>One must discontinue being feasted upon when one tasteth best: that is known by those who want to be long loved.</p>
				<p>Sour apples are there, no doubt, whose lot is to wait until the last day of autumn: and at the same time they become ripe, yellow, and shrivelled.</p>
				<p>In some ageth the heart first, and in others the spirit. And some are hoary in youth, but the late young keep long young.</p>
				<p>To many men life is a failure; a poison-worm gnaweth at their heart. Then let them see to it that their dying is all the more a success.</p>
				<p>Many never become sweet; they rot even in the summer. It is cowardice that holdeth them fast to their branches.</p>
				<p>Far too many live, and far too long hang they on their branches. Would that a storm came and shook all this rottenness and worm-eatenness from the tree!</p>
				<p>Would that there came preachers of <em>speedy</em> death! Those would be the appropriate storms and agitators of the trees of life! But I hear only slow death preached, and patience with all that is “earthly.”</p>
				<p>Ah! ye preach patience with what is earthly? This earthly is it that hath too much patience with you, ye blasphemers!</p>
				<p>Verily, too early died that Hebrew whom the preachers of slow death honour: and to many hath it proved a calamity that he died too early.</p>
				<p>As yet had he known only tears, and the melancholy of the Hebrews, together with the hatred of the good and just⁠—the Hebrew Jesus: then was he seized with the longing for death.</p>
				<p>Had he but remained in the wilderness, and far from the good and just! Then, perhaps, would he have learned to live, and love the earth⁠—and laughter also!</p>
				<p>Believe it, my brethren! He died too early; he himself would have disavowed his doctrine had he attained to my age! Noble enough was he to disavow!</p>
				<p>But he was still immature. Immaturely loveth the youth, and immaturely also hateth he man and earth. Confined and awkward are still his soul and the wings of his spirit.</p>
				<p>But in man there is more of the child than in the youth, and less of melancholy: better understandeth he about life and death.</p>
				<p>Free for death, and free in death; a holy Naysayer, when there is no longer time for Yea: thus understandeth he about death and life.</p>
				<p>That your dying may not be a reproach to man and the earth, my friends: that do I solicit from the honey of your soul.</p>
				<p>In your dying shall your spirit and your virtue still shine like an evening afterglow around the earth: otherwise your dying hath been unsatisfactory.</p>
				<p>Thus will I die myself, that ye friends may love the earth more for my sake; and earth will I again become, to have rest in her that bore me.</p>
				<p>Verily, a goal had Zarathustra; he threw his ball. Now be ye friends the heirs of my goal; to you throw I the golden ball.</p>
				<p>Best of all, do I see you, my friends, throw the golden ball! And so tarry I still a little while on the earth⁠—pardon me for it!</p>
				<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
