<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXXII. THE DANCE-SONG.</h2>
			<p>One evening went Zarathustra and his disciples through the forest; and when he sought for a well, lo, he lighted upon a green meadow peacefully surrounded with trees and bushes, where maidens were dancing together. As soon as the maidens recognised Zarathustra, they ceased dancing; Zarathustra, however, approached them with friendly mien and spake these words:</p>
			<p>Cease not your dancing, ye lovely maidens! No game-spoiler hath come to you with evil eye, no enemy of maidens.</p>
			<p>God’s advocate am I with the devil: he, however, is the spirit of gravity. How could I, ye light-footed ones, be hostile to divine dances? Or to maidens’ feet with fine ankles?</p>
			<p>To be sure, I am a forest, and a night of dark trees: but he who is not afraid of my darkness, will find banks full of roses under my cypresses.</p>
			<p>And even the little God may he find, who is dearest to maidens: beside the well lieth he quietly, with closed eyes.</p>
			<p>Verily, in broad daylight did he fall asleep, the sluggard! Had he perhaps chased butterflies too much?</p>
			<p>Upbraid me not, ye beautiful dancers, when I chasten the little God somewhat! He will cry, certainly, and weep—but he is laughable even when weeping!</p>
			<p>And with tears in his eyes shall he ask you for a dance; and I myself will sing a song to his dance:</p>
			<p>A dance-song and satire on the spirit of gravity my supremest, powerfulest devil, who is said to be “lord of the world.”—</p>
			<p>And this is the song that Zarathustra sang when Cupid and the maidens danced together:</p>
			<p>Of late did I gaze into thine eye, O Life! And into the unfathomable did I there seem to sink.</p>
			<p>But thou pulledst me out with a golden angle; derisively didst thou laugh when I called thee unfathomable.</p>
			<p>“Such is the language of all fish,” saidst thou; “what THEY do not fathom is unfathomable.</p>
			<p>But changeable am I only, and wild, and altogether a woman, and no virtuous one:</p>
			<p>Though I be called by you men the ‘profound one,’ or the ‘faithful one,’ ‘the eternal one,’ ‘the mysterious one.’</p>
			<p>But ye men endow us always with your own virtues—alas, ye virtuous ones!”</p>
			<p>Thus did she laugh, the unbelievable one; but never do I believe her and her laughter, when she speaketh evil of herself.</p>
			<p>And when I talked face to face with my wild Wisdom, she said to me angrily: “Thou willest, thou cravest, thou lovest; on that account alone dost thou PRAISE Life!”</p>
			<p>Then had I almost answered indignantly and told the truth to the angry one; and one cannot answer more indignantly than when one “telleth the truth” to one’s Wisdom.</p>
			<p>For thus do things stand with us three. In my heart do I love only Life—and verily, most when I hate her!</p>
			<p>But that I am fond of Wisdom, and often too fond, is because she remindeth me very strongly of Life!</p>
			<p>She hath her eye, her laugh, and even her golden angle-rod: am I responsible for it that both are so alike?</p>
			<p>And when once Life asked me: “Who is she then, this Wisdom?”—then said I eagerly: “Ah, yes! Wisdom!</p>
			<p>One thirsteth for her and is not satisfied, one looketh through veils, one graspeth through nets.</p>
			<p>Is she beautiful? What do I know! But the oldest carps are still lured by her.</p>
			<p>Changeable is she, and wayward; often have I seen her bite her lip, and pass the comb against the grain of her hair.</p>
			<p>Perhaps she is wicked and false, and altogether a woman; but when she speaketh ill of herself, just then doth she seduce most.”</p>
			<p>When I had said this unto Life, then laughed she maliciously, and shut her eyes. “Of whom dost thou speak?” said she. “Perhaps of me?</p>
			<p>And if thou wert right—is it proper to say THAT in such wise to my face! But now, pray, speak also of thy Wisdom!”</p>
			<p>Ah, and now hast thou again opened thine eyes, O beloved Life! And into the unfathomable have I again seemed to sink.—</p>
			<p>Thus sang Zarathustra. But when the dance was over and the maidens had departed, he became sad.</p>
			<p>“The sun hath been long set,” said he at last, “the meadow is damp, and from the forest cometh coolness.</p>
			<p>An unknown presence is about me, and gazeth thoughtfully. What! Thou livest still, Zarathustra?</p>
			<p>Why? Wherefore? Whereby? Whither? Where? How? Is it not folly still to live?—</p>
			<p>Ah, my friends; the evening is it which thus interrogateth in me. Forgive me my sadness!</p>
			<p>Evening hath come on: forgive me that evening hath come on!”</p>
			<p>Thus sang Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
