<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-54" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>LIV. THE THREE EVIL THINGS.</h2>
			<h3>1.</h3>
			<p>In my dream, in my last morning-dream, I stood to-day on a promontory⁠—beyond the world; I held a pair of scales, and WEIGHED the world.</p>
			<p>Alas, that the rosy dawn came too early to me: she glowed me awake, the jealous one! Jealous is she always of the glows of my morning-dream.</p>
			<p>Measurable by him who hath time, weighable by a good weigher, attainable by strong pinions, divinable by divine nut-crackers: thus did my dream find the world:⁠—</p>
			<p>My dream, a bold sailor, half-ship, half-hurricane, silent as the butterfly, impatient as the falcon: how had it the patience and leisure to-day for world-weighing!</p>
			<p>Did my wisdom perhaps speak secretly to it, my laughing, wide-awake day-wisdom, which mocketh at all “infinite worlds”? For it saith: “Where force is, there becometh NUMBER the master: it hath more force.”</p>
			<p>How confidently did my dream contemplate this finite world, not new-fangledly, not old-fangledly, not timidly, not entreatingly:⁠—</p>
			<p>—As if a big round apple presented itself to my hand, a ripe golden apple, with a coolly-soft, velvety skin:⁠—thus did the world present itself unto me:⁠—</p>
			<p>—As if a tree nodded unto me, a broad-branched, strong-willed tree, curved as a recline and a foot-stool for weary travellers: thus did the world stand on my promontory:⁠—</p>
			<p>—As if delicate hands carried a casket towards me⁠—a casket open for the delectation of modest adoring eyes: thus did the world present itself before me to-day:⁠—</p>
			<p>—Not riddle enough to scare human love from it, not solution enough to put to sleep human wisdom:⁠—a humanly good thing was the world to me to-day, of which such bad things are said!</p>
			<p>How I thank my morning-dream that I thus at to-day’s dawn, weighed the world! As a humanly good thing did it come unto me, this dream and heart-comforter!</p>
			<p>And that I may do the like by day, and imitate and copy its best, now will I put the three worst things on the scales, and weigh them humanly well.⁠—</p>
			<p>He who taught to bless taught also to curse: what are the three best cursed things in the world? These will I put on the scales.</p>
			<p>VOLUPTUOUSNESS, PASSION FOR POWER, and SELFISHNESS: these three things have hitherto been best cursed, and have been in worst and falsest repute⁠—these three things will I weigh humanly well.</p>
			<p>Well! Here is my promontory, and there is the sea⁠—IT rolleth hither unto me, shaggily and fawningly, the old, faithful, hundred-headed dog-monster that I love!⁠—</p>
			<p>Well! Here will I hold the scales over the weltering sea: and also a witness do I choose to look on⁠—thee, the anchorite-tree, thee, the strong-odoured, broad-arched tree that I love!⁠—</p>
			<p>On what bridge goeth the now to the hereafter? By what constraint doth the high stoop to the low? And what enjoineth even the highest still⁠—to grow upwards?⁠—</p>
			<p>Now stand the scales poised and at rest: three heavy questions have I thrown in; three heavy answers carrieth the other scale.</p>
			<p>2.</p>
			<p>Voluptuousness: unto all hair-shirted despisers of the body, a sting and stake; and, cursed as “the world,” by all backworldsmen: for it mocketh and befooleth all erring, misinferring teachers.</p>
			<p>Voluptuousness: to the rabble, the slow fire at which it is burnt; to all wormy wood, to all stinking rags, the prepared heat and stew furnace.</p>
			<p>Voluptuousness: to free hearts, a thing innocent and free, the garden-happiness of the earth, all the future’s thanks-overflow to the present.</p>
			<p>Voluptuousness: only to the withered a sweet poison; to the lion-willed, however, the great cordial, and the reverently saved wine of wines.</p>
			<p>Voluptuousness: the great symbolic happiness of a higher happiness and highest hope. For to many is marriage promised, and more than marriage⁠—</p>
			<p>—To many that are more unknown to each other than man and woman:⁠—and who hath fully understood HOW UNKNOWN to each other are man and woman!</p>
			<p>Voluptuousness:⁠—but I will have hedges around my thoughts, and even around my words, lest swine and libertine should break into my gardens!⁠—</p>
			<p>Passion for power: the glowing scourge of the hardest of the heart-hard; the cruel torture reserved for the cruellest themselves; the gloomy flame of living pyres.</p>
			<p>Passion for power: the wicked gadfly which is mounted on the vainest peoples; the scorner of all uncertain virtue; which rideth on every horse and on every pride.</p>
			<p>Passion for power: the earthquake which breaketh and upbreaketh all that is rotten and hollow; the rolling, rumbling, punitive demolisher of whited sepulchres; the flashing interrogative-sign beside premature answers.</p>
			<p>Passion for power: before whose glance man creepeth and croucheth and drudgeth, and becometh lower than the serpent and the swine:⁠—until at last great contempt crieth out of him⁠—,</p>
			<p>Passion for power: the terrible teacher of great contempt, which preacheth to their face to cities and empires: “Away with thee!”⁠—until a voice crieth out of themselves: “Away with ME!”</p>
			<p>Passion for power: which, however, mounteth alluringly even to the pure and lonesome, and up to self-satisfied elevations, glowing like a love that painteth purple felicities alluringly on earthly heavens.</p>
			<p>Passion for power: but who would call it PASSION, when the height longeth to stoop for power! Verily, nothing sick or diseased is there in such longing and descending!</p>
			<p>That the lonesome height may not for ever remain lonesome and self-sufficing; that the mountains may come to the valleys and the winds of the heights to the plains:⁠—</p>
			<p>Oh, who could find the right prenomen and honouring name for such longing! “Bestowing virtue”⁠—thus did Zarathustra once name the unnamable.</p>
			<p>And then it happened also⁠—and verily, it happened for the first time!⁠—that his word blessed SELFISHNESS, the wholesome, healthy selfishness, that springeth from the powerful soul:⁠—</p>
			<p>—From the powerful soul, to which the high body appertaineth, the handsome, triumphing, refreshing body, around which everything becometh a mirror:</p>
			<p>—The pliant, persuasive body, the dancer, whose symbol and epitome is the self-enjoying soul. Of such bodies and souls the self-enjoyment calleth itself “virtue.”</p>
			<p>With its words of good and bad doth such self-enjoyment shelter itself as with sacred groves; with the names of its happiness doth it banish from itself everything contemptible.</p>
			<p>Away from itself doth it banish everything cowardly; it saith: “Bad⁠—THAT IS cowardly!” Contemptible seem to it the ever-solicitous, the sighing, the complaining, and whoever pick up the most trifling advantage.</p>
			<p>It despiseth also all bitter-sweet wisdom: for verily, there is also wisdom that bloometh in the dark, a night-shade wisdom, which ever sigheth: “All is vain!”</p>
			<p>Shy distrust is regarded by it as base, and every one who wanteth oaths instead of looks and hands: also all over-distrustful wisdom⁠—for such is the mode of cowardly souls.</p>
			<p>Baser still it regardeth the obsequious, doggish one, who immediately lieth on his back, the submissive one; and there is also wisdom that is submissive, and doggish, and pious, and obsequious.</p>
			<p>Hateful to it altogether, and a loathing, is he who will never defend himself, he who swalloweth down poisonous spittle and bad looks, the all-too-patient one, the all-endurer, the all-satisfied one: for that is the mode of slaves.</p>
			<p>Whether they be servile before Gods and divine spurnings, or before men and stupid human opinions: at ALL kinds of slaves doth it spit, this blessed selfishness!</p>
			<p>Bad: thus doth it call all that is spirit-broken, and sordidly-servile⁠—constrained, blinking eyes, depressed hearts, and the false submissive style, which kisseth with broad cowardly lips.</p>
			<p>And spurious wisdom: so doth it call all the wit that slaves, and hoary-headed and weary ones affect; and especially all the cunning, spurious-witted, curious-witted foolishness of priests!</p>
			<p>The spurious wise, however, all the priests, the world-weary, and those whose souls are of feminine and servile nature⁠—oh, how hath their game all along abused selfishness!</p>
			<p>And precisely THAT was to be virtue and was to be called virtue⁠—to abuse selfishness! And “selfless”⁠—so did they wish themselves with good reason, all those world-weary cowards and cross-spiders!</p>
			<p>But to all those cometh now the day, the change, the sword of judgment, THE GREAT NOONTIDE: then shall many things be revealed!</p>
			<p>And he who proclaimeth the EGO wholesome and holy, and selfishness blessed, verily, he, the prognosticator, speaketh also what he knoweth: “BEHOLD, IT COMETH, IT IS NIGH, THE GREAT NOONTIDE!”</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
