<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XVIII. OLD AND YOUNG WOMEN.</h2>
			<p>“Why stealest thou along so furtively in the twilight, Zarathustra? And what hidest thou so carefully under thy mantle?</p>
			<p>Is it a treasure that hath been given thee? Or a child that hath been born thee? Or goest thou thyself on a thief’s errand, thou friend of the evil?”⁠—</p>
			<p>Verily, my brother, said Zarathustra, it is a treasure that hath been given me: it is a little truth which I carry.</p>
			<p>But it is naughty, like a young child; and if I hold not its mouth, it screameth too loudly.</p>
			<p>As I went on my way alone to-day, at the hour when the sun declineth, there met me an old woman, and she spake thus unto my soul:</p>
			<p>“Much hath Zarathustra spoken also to us women, but never spake he unto us concerning woman.”</p>
			<p>And I answered her: “Concerning woman, one should only talk unto men.”</p>
			<p>“Talk also unto me of woman,” said she; “I am old enough to forget it presently.”</p>
			<p>And I obliged the old woman and spake thus unto her:</p>
			<p>Everything in woman is a riddle, and everything in woman hath one solution⁠—it is called pregnancy.</p>
			<p>Man is for woman a means: the purpose is always the child. But what is woman for man?</p>
			<p>Two different things wanteth the true man: danger and diversion. Therefore wanteth he woman, as the most dangerous plaything.</p>
			<p>Man shall be trained for war, and woman for the recreation of the warrior: all else is folly.</p>
			<p>Too sweet fruits⁠—these the warrior liketh not. Therefore liketh he woman;⁠—bitter is even the sweetest woman.</p>
			<p>Better than man doth woman understand children, but man is more childish than woman.</p>
			<p>In the true man there is a child hidden: it wanteth to play. Up then, ye women, and discover the child in man!</p>
			<p>A plaything let woman be, pure and fine like the precious stone, illumined with the virtues of a world not yet come.</p>
			<p>Let the beam of a star shine in your love! Let your hope say: “May I bear the Superman!”</p>
			<p>In your love let there be valour! With your love shall ye assail him who inspireth you with fear!</p>
			<p>In your love be your honour! Little doth woman understand otherwise about honour. But let this be your honour: always to love more than ye are loved, and never be the second.</p>
			<p>Let man fear woman when she loveth: then maketh she every sacrifice, and everything else she regardeth as worthless.</p>
			<p>Let man fear woman when she hateth: for man in his innermost soul is merely evil; woman, however, is mean.</p>
			<p>Whom hateth woman most?⁠—Thus spake the iron to the loadstone: “I hate thee most, because thou attractest, but art too weak to draw unto thee.”</p>
			<p>The happiness of man is, “I will.” The happiness of woman is, “He will.”</p>
			<p>“Lo! now hath the world become perfect!”⁠—thus thinketh every woman when she obeyeth with all her love.</p>
			<p>Obey, must the woman, and find a depth for her surface. Surface, is woman’s soul, a mobile, stormy film on shallow water.</p>
			<p>Man’s soul, however, is deep, its current gusheth in subterranean caverns: woman surmiseth its force, but comprehendeth it not.⁠—</p>
			<p>Then answered me the old woman: “Many fine things hath Zarathustra said, especially for those who are young enough for them.</p>
			<p>Strange! Zarathustra knoweth little about woman, and yet he is right about them! Doth this happen, because with women nothing is impossible?</p>
			<p>And now accept a little truth by way of thanks! I am old enough for it!</p>
			<p>Swaddle it up and hold its mouth: otherwise it will scream too loudly, the little truth.”</p>
			<p>“Give me, woman, thy little truth!” said I. And thus spake the old woman:</p>
			<p>“Thou goest to women? Do not forget thy whip!”⁠—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
