<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-58" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">The Great Longing</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>O my soul, I have taught thee to say “to-day” as “once on a time” and “formerly,” and to dance thy measure over every Here and There and Yonder.</p>
				<p>O my soul, I delivered thee from all by-places, I brushed down from thee dust and spiders and twilight.</p>
				<p>O my soul, I washed the petty shame and the by-place virtue from thee, and persuaded thee to stand naked before the eyes of the sun.</p>
				<p>With the storm that is called “spirit” did I blow over thy surging sea; all clouds did I blow away from it; I strangled even the strangler called “sin.”</p>
				<p>O my soul, I gave thee the right to say Nay like the storm, and to say Yea as the open heaven saith Yea: calm as the light remainest thou, and now walkest through denying storms.</p>
				<p>O my soul, I restored to thee liberty over the created and the uncreated; and who knoweth, as thou knowest, the voluptuousness of the future?</p>
				<p>O my soul, I taught thee the contempt which doth not come like worm-eating, the great, the loving contempt, which loveth most where it contemneth most.</p>
				<p>O my soul, I taught thee so to persuade that thou persuadest even the grounds themselves to thee: like the sun, which persuadeth even the sea to its height.</p>
				<p>O my soul, I have taken from thee all obeying and knee-bending and homage-paying; I have myself given thee the names, “Change of need” and “Fate.”</p>
				<p>O my soul, I have given thee new names and gay-coloured playthings, I have called thee “Fate” and “the Circuit of circuits” and “the Navel-string of time” and “the Azure bell.”</p>
				<p>O my soul, to thy domain gave I all wisdom to drink, all new wines, and also all immemorially old strong wines of wisdom.</p>
				<p>O my soul, every sun shed I upon thee, and every night and every silence and every longing:⁠—then grewest thou up for me as a vine.</p>
				<p>O my soul, exuberant and heavy dost thou now stand forth, a vine with swelling udders and full clusters of brown golden grapes:⁠—</p>
				<p>—Filled and weighted by thy happiness, waiting from superabundance, and yet ashamed of thy waiting.</p>
				<p>O my soul, there is nowhere a soul which could be more loving and more comprehensive and more extensive! Where could future and past be closer together than with thee?</p>
				<p>O my soul, I have given thee everything, and all my hands have become empty by thee:⁠—and now! Now sayest thou to me, smiling and full of melancholy: “Which of us oweth thanks?⁠—</p>
				<p>—Doth the giver not owe thanks because the receiver received? Is bestowing not a necessity? Is receiving not⁠—pitying?”⁠—</p>
				<p>O my soul, I understand the smiling of thy melancholy: thine over-abundance itself now stretcheth out longing hands!</p>
				<p>Thy fulness looketh forth over raging seas, and seeketh and waiteth: the longing of over-fulness looketh forth from the smiling heaven of thine eyes!</p>
				<p>And verily, O my soul! Who could see thy smiling and not melt into tears? The angels themselves melt into tears through the over-graciousness of thy smiling.</p>
				<p>Thy graciousness and over-graciousness, is it which will not complain and weep: and yet, O my soul, longeth thy smiling for tears, and thy trembling mouth for sobs.</p>
				<p>“Is not all weeping complaining? And all complaining, accusing?” Thus speakest thou to thyself; and therefore, O my soul, wilt thou rather smile than pour forth thy grief⁠—</p>
				<p>—Than in gushing tears pour forth all thy grief concerning thy fulness, and concerning the craving of the vine for the vintager and vintage-knife!</p>
				<p>But wilt thou not weep, wilt thou not weep forth thy purple melancholy, then wilt thou have to <em>sing</em>, O my soul!⁠—Behold, I smile myself, who foretell thee this:</p>
				<p>—Thou wilt have to sing with passionate song, until all seas turn calm to hearken unto thy longing⁠—</p>
				<p>—Until over calm longing seas the bark glideth, the golden marvel, around the gold of which all good, bad, and marvellous things frisk:⁠—</p>
				<p>—Also many large and small animals, and everything that hath light marvellous feet, so that it can run on violet-blue paths⁠—</p>
				<p>—Towards the golden marvel, the spontaneous bark, and its master: he, however, is the vintager who waiteth with the diamond vintage-knife⁠—</p>
				<p>—Thy great deliverer, O my soul, the nameless one⁠—for whom future songs only will find names! And verily, already hath thy breath the fragrance of future songs⁠—</p>
				<p>—Already glowest thou and dreamest, already drinkest thou thirstily at all deep echoing wells of consolation, already reposeth thy melancholy in the bliss of future songs!⁠—</p>
				<p>O my soul, now have I given thee all, and even my last possession, and all my hands have become empty by thee:⁠—<em>that I bade thee sing</em>, behold, that was my last thing to give!</p>
				<p>That I bade thee sing⁠—say now, say: <em>which</em> of us now⁠—oweth thanks?⁠—Better still, however: sing unto me, sing, O my soul! And let me thank thee!⁠—</p>
				<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
