<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLIV: The Stillest Hour</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-44" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Stillest Hour</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>What hath happened unto me, my friends? Ye see me troubled, driven forth, unwillingly obedient, ready to go⁠—alas, to go away from <em>you</em>!</p>
			<p>Yea, once more must Zarathustra retire to his solitude: but unjoyously this time doth the bear go back to his cave!</p>
			<p>What hath happened unto me? Who ordereth this?⁠—Ah, mine angry mistress wisheth it so; she spake unto me. Have I ever named her name to you?</p>
			<p>Yesterday towards evening there spake unto me <em>my stillest hour</em>: that is the name of my terrible mistress.</p>
			<p>And thus did it happen⁠—for everything must I tell you, that your heart may not harden against the suddenly departing one!</p>
			<p>Do ye know the terror of him who falleth asleep?⁠—</p>
			<p>To the very toes he is terrified, because the ground giveth way under him, and the dream beginneth.</p>
			<p>This do I speak unto you in parable. Yesterday at the stillest hour did the ground give way under me: the dream began.</p>
			<p>The hour-hand moved on, the timepiece of my life drew breath⁠—never did I hear such stillness around me, so that my heart was terrified.</p>
			<p>Then was there spoken unto me without voice: “<em>Thou knowest it, Zarathustra?</em>”⁠—</p>
			<p>And I cried in terror at this whispering, and the blood left my face: but I was silent.</p>
			<p>Then was there once more spoken unto me without voice: “Thou knowest it, Zarathustra, but thou dost not speak it!”⁠—</p>
			<p>And at last I answered, like one defiant: “Yea, I know it, but I will not speak it!”</p>
			<p>Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “Thou <em>wilt</em> not, Zarathustra? Is this true? Conceal thyself not behind thy defiance!”⁠—</p>
			<p>And I wept and trembled like a child, and said: “Ah, I would indeed, but how can I do it! Exempt me only from this! It is beyond my power!”</p>
			<p>Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “What matter about thyself, Zarathustra! Speak thy word, and succumb!”</p>
			<p>And I answered: “Ah, is it <em>my</em> word? Who am <em>I</em>? I await the worthier one; I am not worthy even to succumb by it.”</p>
			<p>Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “What matter about thyself? Thou art not yet humble enough for me. Humility hath the hardest skin.”⁠—</p>
			<p>And I answered: “What hath not the skin of my humility endured! At the foot of my height do I dwell: how high are my summits, no one hath yet told me. But well do I know my valleys.”</p>
			<p>Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “O Zarathustra, he who hath to remove mountains removeth also valleys and plains.”⁠—</p>
			<p>And I answered: “As yet hath my word not removed mountains, and what I have spoken hath not reached man. I went, indeed, unto men, but not yet have I attained unto them.”</p>
			<p>Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “What knowest thou <em>thereof</em>! The dew falleth on the grass when the night is most silent.”⁠—</p>
			<p>And I answered: “They mocked me when I found and walked in mine own path; and certainly did my feet then tremble.</p>
			<p>“And thus did they speak unto me: Thou forgottest the path before, now dost thou also forget how to walk!”</p>
			<p>Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “What matter about their mockery! Thou art one who hast unlearned to obey: now shalt thou command!</p>
			<p>“Knowest thou not who is most needed by all? He who commandeth great things.</p>
			<p>“To execute great things is difficult: but the more difficult task is to command great things.</p>
			<p>“This is thy most unpardonable obstinacy: thou hast the power, and thou wilt not rule.”⁠—</p>
			<p>And I answered: “I lack the lion’s voice for all commanding.”</p>
			<p>Then was there again spoken unto me as a whispering: “It is the stillest words which bring the storm. Thoughts that come with doves’ footsteps guide the world.</p>
			<p>“O Zarathustra, thou shalt go as a shadow of that which is to come: thus wilt thou command, and in commanding go foremost.”⁠—</p>
			<p>And I answered: “I am ashamed.”</p>
			<p>Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “Thou must yet become a child, and be without shame.</p>
			<p>“The pride of youth is still upon thee; late hast thou become young: but he who would become a child must surmount even his youth.”⁠—</p>
			<p>And I considered a long while, and trembled. At last, however, did I say what I had said at first. “I will not.”</p>
			<p>Then did a laughing take place all around me. Alas, how that laughing lacerated my bowels and cut into my heart!</p>
			<p>And there was spoken unto me for the last time: “O Zarathustra, thy fruits are ripe, but thou art not ripe for thy fruits!</p>
			<p>“So must thou go again into solitude: for thou shalt yet become mellow.”⁠—</p>
			<p>And again was there a laughing, and it fled: then did it become still around me, as with a double stillness. I lay, however, on the ground, and the sweat flowed from my limbs.</p>
			<p>—Now have ye heard all, and why I have to return into my solitude. Nothing have I kept hidden from you, my friends.</p>
			<p>But even this have ye heard from me, <em>who</em> is still the most reserved of men⁠—and will be so!</p>
			<p>Ah, my friends! I should have something more to say unto you! I should have something more to give unto you! Why do I not give it? Am I then a niggard?⁠—</p>
			<p>When, however, Zarathustra had spoken these words, the violence of his pain, and a sense of the nearness of his departure from his friends came over him, so that he wept aloud; and no one knew how to console him. In the night, however, he went away alone and left his friends.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
