<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLIII: Manly Prudence</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-43" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">Manly Prudence</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Not the height, it is the declivity that is terrible!</p>
			<p>The declivity, where the gaze shooteth <em>downwards</em>, and the hand graspeth <em>upwards</em>. There doth the heart become giddy through its double will.</p>
			<p>Ah, friends, do ye divine also my heart’s double will?</p>
			<p>This, this is <em>my</em> declivity and my danger, that my gaze shooteth towards the summit, and my hand would fain clutch and lean⁠—on the depth!</p>
			<p>To man clingeth my will; with chains do I bind myself to man, because I am pulled upwards to the Superman: for thither doth mine other will tend.</p>
			<p>And <em>therefore</em> do I live blindly among men, as if I knew them not: that my hand may not entirely lose belief in firmness.</p>
			<p>I know not you men: this gloom and consolation is often spread around me.</p>
			<p>I sit at the gateway for every rogue, and ask: Who wisheth to deceive me?</p>
			<p>This is my first manly prudence, that I allow myself to be deceived, so as not to be on my guard against deceivers.</p>
			<p>Ah, if I were on my guard against man, how could man be an anchor to my ball! Too easily would I be pulled upwards and away!</p>
			<p>This providence is over my fate, that I have to be without foresight.</p>
			<p>And he who would not languish amongst men, must learn to drink out of all glasses; and he who would keep clean amongst men, must know how to wash himself even with dirty water.</p>
			<p>And thus spake I often to myself for consolation: “Courage! Cheer up! old heart! An unhappiness hath failed to befall thee: enjoy that as thy⁠—happiness!”</p>
			<p>This, however, is mine other manly prudence: I am more forbearing to the <em>vain</em> than to the proud.</p>
			<p>Is not wounded vanity the mother of all tragedies? Where, however, pride is wounded, there there groweth up something better than pride.</p>
			<p>That life may be fair to behold, its game must be well played; for that purpose, however, it needeth good actors.</p>
			<p>Good actors have I found all the vain ones: they play, and wish people to be fond of beholding them⁠—all their spirit is in this wish.</p>
			<p>They represent themselves, they invent themselves; in their neighbourhood I like to look upon life⁠—it cureth of melancholy.</p>
			<p>Therefore am I forbearing to the vain, because they are the physicians of my melancholy, and keep me attached to man as to a drama.</p>
			<p>And further, who conceiveth the full depth of the modesty of the vain man! I am favourable to him, and sympathetic on account of his modesty.</p>
			<p>From you would he learn his belief in himself; he feedeth upon your glances, he eateth praise out of your hands.</p>
			<p>Your lies doth he even believe when you lie favourably about him: for in its depths sigheth his heart: “What am <em>I</em>?”</p>
			<p>And if that be the true virtue which is unconscious of itself⁠—well, the vain man is unconscious of his modesty!⁠—</p>
			<p>This is, however, my third manly prudence: I am not put out of conceit with the <em>wicked</em> by your timorousness.</p>
			<p>I am happy to see the marvels the warm sun hatcheth: tigers and palms and rattlesnakes.</p>
			<p>Also amongst men there is a beautiful brood of the warm sun, and much that is marvellous in the wicked.</p>
			<p>In truth, as your wisest did not seem to me so very wise, so found I also human wickedness below the fame of it.</p>
			<p>And oft did I ask with a shake of the head: Why still rattle, ye rattlesnakes?</p>
			<p>Verily, there is still a future even for evil! And the warmest south is still undiscovered by man.</p>
			<p>How many things are now called the worst wickedness, which are only twelve feet broad and three months long! Some day, however, will greater dragons come into the world.</p>
			<p>For that the Superman may not lack his dragon, the superdragon that is worthy of him, there must still much warm sun glow on moist virgin forests!</p>
			<p>Out of your wild cats must tigers have evolved, and out of your poison-toads, crocodiles: for the good hunter shall have a good hunt!</p>
			<p>And verily, ye good and just! In you there is much to be laughed at, and especially your fear of what hath hitherto been called “the devil!”</p>
			<p>So alien are ye in your souls to what is great, that to you the Superman would be <em>frightful</em> in his goodness!</p>
			<p>And ye wise and knowing ones, ye would flee from the solar-glow of the wisdom in which the Superman joyfully batheth his nakedness!</p>
			<p>Ye highest men who have come within my ken! this is my doubt of you, and my secret laughter: I suspect ye would call my Superman⁠—a devil!</p>
			<p>Ah, I became tired of those highest and best ones: from their “height” did I long to be up, out, and away to the Superman!</p>
			<p>A horror came over me when I saw those best ones naked: then there grew for me the pinions to soar away into distant futures.</p>
			<p>Into more distant futures, into more southern souths than ever artist dreamed of: thither, where Gods are ashamed of all clothes!</p>
			<p>But disguised do I want to see <em>you</em>, ye neighbours and fellowmen, and well-attired and vain and estimable, as “the good and just;”⁠—</p>
			<p>And disguised will I myself sit amongst you⁠—that I may <em>mistake</em> you and myself: for that is my last manly prudence.⁠—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
