<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>L</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-50" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>On the Olive-Mount</h2>
			<p>Winter, a bad guest, sitteth with me at home; blue are my hands with his friendly hand-shaking.</p>
			<p>I honour him, that bad guest, but gladly leave him alone. Gladly do I run away from him; and when one runneth WELL, then one escapeth him!</p>
			<p>With warm feet and warm thoughts do I run where the wind is calm⁠—to the sunny corner of mine olive-mount.</p>
			<p>There do I laugh at my stern guest, and am still fond of him; because he cleareth my house of flies, and quieteth many little noises.</p>
			<p>For he suffereth it not if a gnat wanteth to buzz, or even two of them; also the lanes maketh he lonesome, so that the moonlight is afraid there at night.</p>
			<p>A hard guest is he⁠—but I honour him, and do not worship, like the tenderlings, the pot-bellied fire-idol.</p>
			<p>Better even a little teeth-chattering than idol-adoration!⁠—so willeth my nature. And especially have I a grudge against all ardent, steaming, steamy fire-idols.</p>
			<p>Him whom I love, I love better in winter than in summer; better do I now mock at mine enemies, and more heartily, when winter sitteth in my house.</p>
			<p>Heartily, verily, even when I CREEP into bed⁠—: there, still laugheth and wantoneth my hidden happiness; even my deceptive dream laugheth.</p>
			<p>I, a⁠—creeper? Never in my life did I creep before the powerful; and if ever I lied, then did I lie out of love. Therefore am I glad even in my winter-bed.</p>
			<p>A poor bed warmeth me more than a rich one, for I am jealous of my poverty. And in winter she is most faithful unto me.</p>
			<p>With a wickedness do I begin every day: I mock at the winter with a cold bath: on that account grumbleth my stern house-mate.</p>
			<p>Also do I like to tickle him with a wax-taper, that he may finally let the heavens emerge from ashy-grey twilight.</p>
			<p>For especially wicked am I in the morning: at the early hour when the pail rattleth at the well, and horses neigh warmly in grey lanes:⁠—</p>
			<p>Impatiently do I then wait, that the clear sky may finally dawn for me, the snow-bearded winter-sky, the hoary one, the white-head⁠—</p>
			<p>—The winter-sky, the silent winter-sky, which often stifleth even its sun!</p>
			<p>Did I perhaps learn from it the long clear silence? Or did it learn it from me? Or hath each of us devised it himself?</p>
			<p>Of all good things the origin is a thousandfold⁠—all good roguish things spring into existence for joy: how could they always do so⁠—for once only!</p>
			<p>A good roguish thing is also the long silence, and to look, like the winter-sky, out of a clear, round-eyed countenance:⁠—</p>
			<p>—Like it to stifle one’s sun, and one’s inflexible solar will: verily, this art and this winter-roguishness have I learnt WELL!</p>
			<p>My best-loved wickedness and art is it, that my silence hath learned not to betray itself by silence.</p>
			<p>Clattering with diction and dice, I outwit the solemn assistants: all those stern watchers, shall my will and purpose elude.</p>
			<p>That no one might see down into my depth and into mine ultimate will⁠—for that purpose did I devise the long clear silence.</p>
			<p>Many a shrewd one did I find: he veiled his countenance and made his water muddy, that no one might see therethrough and thereunder.</p>
			<p>But precisely unto him came the shrewder distrusters and nut-crackers: precisely from him did they fish his best-concealed fish!</p>
			<p>But the clear, the honest, the transparent⁠—these are for me the wisest silent ones: in them, so PROFOUND is the depth that even the clearest water doth not⁠—betray it.⁠—</p>
			<p>Thou snow-bearded, silent, winter-sky, thou round-eyed whitehead above me! Oh, thou heavenly simile of my soul and its wantonness!</p>
			<p>And MUST I not conceal myself like one who hath swallowed gold⁠—lest my soul should be ripped up?</p>
			<p>MUST I not wear stilts, that they may OVERLOOK my long legs⁠—all those enviers and injurers around me?</p>
			<p>Those dingy, fire-warmed, used-up, green-tinted, ill-natured souls⁠—how COULD their envy endure my happiness!</p>
			<p>Thus do I show them only the ice and winter of my peaks⁠—and NOT that my mountain windeth all the solar girdles around it!</p>
			<p>They hear only the whistling of my winter-storms: and know NOT that I also travel over warm seas, like longing, heavy, hot south-winds.</p>
			<p>They commiserate also my accidents and chances:⁠—but MY word saith: “Suffer the chance to come unto me: innocent is it as a little child!”</p>
			<p>How COULD they endure my happiness, if I did not put around it accidents, and winter-privations, and bear-skin caps, and enmantling snowflakes!</p>
			<p>—If I did not myself commiserate their PITY, the pity of those enviers and injurers!</p>
			<p>—If I did not myself sigh before them, and chatter with cold, and patiently LET myself be swathed in their pity!</p>
			<p>This is the wise waggish-will and good-will of my soul, that it CONCEALETH NOT its winters and glacial storms; it concealeth not its chilblains either.</p>
			<p>To one man, lonesomeness is the flight of the sick one; to another, it is the flight FROM the sick ones.</p>
			<p>Let them HEAR me chattering and sighing with winter-cold, all those poor squinting knaves around me! With such sighing and chattering do I flee from their heated rooms.</p>
			<p>Let them sympathise with me and sigh with me on account of my chilblains: “At the ice of knowledge will he yet FREEZE TO DEATH!”⁠—so they mourn.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile do I run with warm feet hither and thither on mine olive-mount: in the sunny corner of mine olive-mount do I sing, and mock at all pity.⁠—</p>
			<p>Thus sang Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
