<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-37" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXXVII. IMMACULATE PERCEPTION.</h2>
			<p>When yester-eve the moon arose, then did I fancy it about to bear a sun: so broad and teeming did it lie on the horizon.</p>
			<p>But it was a liar with its pregnancy; and sooner will I believe in the man in the moon than in the woman.</p>
			<p>To be sure, little of a man is he also, that timid night-reveller. Verily, with a bad conscience doth he stalk over the roofs.</p>
			<p>For he is covetous and jealous, the monk in the moon; covetous of the earth, and all the joys of lovers.</p>
			<p>Nay, I like him not, that tom-cat on the roofs! Hateful unto me are all that slink around half-closed windows!</p>
			<p>Piously and silently doth he stalk along on the star-carpets:⁠—but I like no light-treading human feet, on which not even a spur jingleth.</p>
			<p>Every honest one’s step speaketh; the cat however, stealeth along over the ground. Lo! cat-like doth the moon come along, and dishonestly.⁠—</p>
			<p>This parable speak I unto you sentimental dissemblers, unto you, the “pure discerners!” You do <i>I</i> call⁠—covetous ones!</p>
			<p>Also ye love the earth, and the earthly: I have divined you well!⁠—but shame is in your love, and a bad conscience⁠—ye are like the moon!</p>
			<p>To despise the earthly hath your spirit been persuaded, but not your bowels: these, however, are the strongest in you!</p>
			<p>And now is your spirit ashamed to be at the service of your bowels, and goeth by-ways and lying ways to escape its own shame.</p>
			<p>“That would be the highest thing for me”⁠—so saith your lying spirit unto itself⁠—“to gaze upon life without desire, and not like the dog, with hanging-out tongue:</p>
			<p>To be happy in gazing: with dead will, free from the grip and greed of selfishness⁠—cold and ashy-grey all over, but with intoxicated moon-eyes!</p>
			<p>That would be the dearest thing to me”⁠—thus doth the seduced one seduce himself⁠—“to love the earth as the moon loveth it, and with the eye only to feel its beauty.</p>
			<p>And this do I call IMMACULATE perception of all things: to want nothing else from them, but to be allowed to lie before them as a mirror with a hundred facets.”⁠—</p>
			<p>Oh, ye sentimental dissemblers, ye covetous ones! Ye lack innocence in your desire: and now do ye defame desiring on that account!</p>
			<p>Verily, not as creators, as procreators, or as jubilators do ye love the earth!</p>
			<p>Where is innocence? Where there is will to procreation. And he who seeketh to create beyond himself, hath for me the purest will.</p>
			<p>Where is beauty? Where I MUST WILL with my whole Will; where I will love and perish, that an image may not remain merely an image.</p>
			<p>Loving and perishing: these have rhymed from eternity. Will to love: that is to be ready also for death. Thus do I speak unto you cowards!</p>
			<p>But now doth your emasculated ogling profess to be “contemplation!” And that which can be examined with cowardly eyes is to be christened “beautiful!” Oh, ye violators of noble names!</p>
			<p>But it shall be your curse, ye immaculate ones, ye pure discerners, that ye shall never bring forth, even though ye lie broad and teeming on the horizon!</p>
			<p>Verily, ye fill your mouth with noble words: and we are to believe that your heart overfloweth, ye cozeners?</p>
			<p>But MY words are poor, contemptible, stammering words: gladly do I pick up what falleth from the table at your repasts.</p>
			<p>Yet still can I say therewith the truth⁠—to dissemblers! Yea, my fish-bones, shells, and prickly leaves shall⁠—tickle the noses of dissemblers!</p>
			<p>Bad air is always about you and your repasts: your lascivious thoughts, your lies, and secrets are indeed in the air!</p>
			<p>Dare only to believe in yourselves⁠—in yourselves and in your inward parts! He who doth not believe in himself always lieth.</p>
			<p>A God’s mask have ye hung in front of you, ye “pure ones”: into a God’s mask hath your execrable coiling snake crawled.</p>
			<p>Verily ye deceive, ye “contemplative ones!” Even Zarathustra was once the dupe of your godlike exterior; he did not divine the serpent’s coil with which it was stuffed.</p>
			<p>A God’s soul, I once thought I saw playing in your games, ye pure discerners! No better arts did I once dream of than your arts!</p>
			<p>Serpents’ filth and evil odour, the distance concealed from me: and that a lizard’s craft prowled thereabouts lasciviously.</p>
			<p>But I came NIGH unto you: then came to me the day⁠—and now cometh it to you⁠—at an end is the moon’s love affair!</p>
			<p>See there! Surprised and pale doth it stand⁠—before the rosy dawn!</p>
			<p>For already she cometh, the glowing one⁠—HER love to the earth cometh! Innocence and creative desire, is all solar love!</p>
			<p>See there, how she cometh impatiently over the sea! Do ye not feel the thirst and the hot breath of her love?</p>
			<p>At the sea would she suck, and drink its depths to her height: now riseth the desire of the sea with its thousand breasts.</p>
			<p>Kissed and sucked WOULD it be by the thirst of the sun; vapour WOULD it become, and height, and path of light, and light itself!</p>
			<p>Verily, like the sun do I love life, and all deep seas.</p>
			<p>And this meaneth TO ME knowledge: all that is deep shall ascend⁠—to my height!⁠—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
