<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII: The Virtuous</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Virtuous</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>With thunder and heavenly fireworks must one speak to indolent and somnolent senses.</p>
			<p>But beauty’s voice speaketh gently: it appealeth only to the most awakened souls.</p>
			<p>Gently vibrated and laughed unto me today my buckler; it was beauty’s holy laughing and thrilling.</p>
			<p>At you, ye virtuous ones, laughed my beauty today. And thus came its voice unto me: “They want⁠—to be paid besides!”</p>
			<p>Ye want to be paid besides, ye virtuous ones! Ye want reward for virtue, and heaven for earth, and eternity for your today?</p>
			<p>And now ye upbraid me for teaching that there is no reward-giver, nor paymaster? And verily, I do not even teach that virtue is its own reward.</p>
			<p>Ah! this is my sorrow: into the basis of things have reward and punishment been insinuated⁠—and now even into the basis of your souls, ye virtuous ones!</p>
			<p>But like the snout of the boar shall my word grub up the basis of your souls; a ploughshare will I be called by you.</p>
			<p>All the secrets of your heart shall be brought to light; and when ye lie in the sun, grubbed up and broken, then will also your falsehood be separated from your truth.</p>
			<p>For this is your truth: ye are <em>too pure</em> for the filth of the words: vengeance, punishment, recompense, retribution.</p>
			<p>Ye love your virtue as a mother loveth her child; but when did one hear of a mother wanting to be paid for her love?</p>
			<p>It is your dearest Self, your virtue. The ring’s thirst is in you: to reach itself again struggleth every ring, and turneth itself.</p>
			<p>And like the star that goeth out, so is every work of your virtue: ever is its light on its way and travelling⁠—and when will it cease to be on its way?</p>
			<p>Thus is the light of your virtue still on its way, even when its work is done. Be it forgotten and dead, still its ray of light liveth and travelleth.</p>
			<p>That your virtue is your Self, and not an outward thing, a skin, or a cloak: that is the truth from the basis of your souls, ye virtuous ones!⁠—</p>
			<p>But sure enough there are those to whom virtue meaneth writhing under the lash: and ye have hearkened too much unto their crying!</p>
			<p>And others are there who call virtue the slothfulness of their vices; and when once their hatred and jealousy relax the limbs, their “justice” becometh lively and rubbeth its sleepy eyes.</p>
			<p>And others are there who are drawn downwards: their devils draw them. But the more they sink, the more ardently gloweth their eye, and the longing for their God.</p>
			<p>Ah! their crying also hath reached your ears, ye virtuous ones: “What I am <em>not</em>, that, that is God to me, and virtue!”</p>
			<p>And others are there who go along heavily and creakingly, like carts taking stones downhill: they talk much of dignity and virtue⁠—their drag they call virtue!</p>
			<p>And others are there who are like eight-day clocks when wound up; they tick, and want people to call ticking⁠—virtue.</p>
			<p>Verily, in those have I mine amusement: wherever I find such clocks I shall wind them up with my mockery, and they shall even whirr thereby!</p>
			<p>And others are proud of their modicum of righteousness, and for the sake of it do violence to all things: so that the world is drowned in their unrighteousness.</p>
			<p>Ah! how ineptly cometh the word “virtue” out of their mouth! And when they say: “I am just,” it always soundeth like: “I am just⁠—revenged!”</p>
			<p>With their virtues they want to scratch out the eyes of their enemies; and they elevate themselves only that they may lower others.</p>
			<p>And again there are those who sit in their swamp, and speak thus from among the bulrushes: “Virtue⁠—that is to sit quietly in the swamp.</p>
			<p>“We bite no one, and go out of the way of him who would bite; and in all matters we have the opinion that is given us.”</p>
			<p>And again there are those who love attitudes, and think that virtue is a sort of attitude.</p>
			<p>Their knees continually adore, and their hands are eulogies of virtue, but their heart knoweth naught thereof.</p>
			<p>And again there are those who regard it as virtue to say: “Virtue is necessary”; but after all they believe only that policemen are necessary.</p>
			<p>And many a one who cannot see men’s loftiness, calleth it virtue to see their baseness far too well: thus calleth he his evil eye virtue.⁠—</p>
			<p>And some want to be edified and raised up, and call it virtue: and others want to be cast down⁠—and likewise call it virtue.</p>
			<p>And thus do almost all think that they participate in virtue; and at least everyone claimeth to be an authority on “good” and “evil.”</p>
			<p>But Zarathustra came not to say unto all those liars and fools: “What do <em>ye</em> know of virtue! What <em>could</em> ye know of virtue!”⁠—</p>
			<p>But that ye, my friends, might become weary of the old words which ye have learned from the fools and liars:</p>
			<p>That ye might become weary of the words “reward,” “retribution,” “punishment,” “righteous vengeance.”⁠—</p>
			<p>That ye might become weary of saying: “That an action is good is because it is unselfish.”</p>
			<p>Ah! my friends! That <em>your</em> very Self be in your action, as the mother is in the child: let that be <em>your</em> formula of virtue!</p>
			<p>Verily, I have taken from you a hundred formulae and your virtue’s favourite playthings; and now ye upbraid me, as children upbraid.</p>
			<p>They played by the sea⁠—then came there a wave and swept their playthings into the deep: and now do they cry.</p>
			<p>But the same wave shall bring them new playthings, and spread before them new speckled shells!</p>
			<p>Thus will they be comforted; and like them shall ye also, my friends, have your comforting⁠—and new speckled shells!⁠—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
