<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-39" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Poets</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>“Since I have known the body better”⁠—said Zarathustra to one of his disciples⁠—“the spirit hath only been to me symbolically spirit; and all the ‘imperishable’⁠—that is also but a simile.”</p>
				<p>“So have I heard thee say once before,” answered the disciple, “and then thou addedst: ‘But the poets lie too much.’ Why didst thou say that the poets lie too much?”</p>
				<p>“Why?” said Zarathustra. “Thou askest why? I do not belong to those who may be asked after their Why.</p>
				<p>Is my experience but of yesterday? It is long ago that I experienced the reasons for mine opinions.</p>
				<p>Should I not have to be a cask of memory, if I also wanted to have my reasons with me?</p>
				<p>It is already too much for me even to retain mine opinions; and many a bird flieth away.</p>
				<p>And sometimes, also, do I find a fugitive creature in my dovecote, which is alien to me, and trembleth when I lay my hand upon it.</p>
				<p>But what did Zarathustra once say unto thee? That the poets lie too much?⁠—But Zarathustra also is a poet.</p>
				<p>Believest thou that he there spake the truth? Why dost thou believe it?”</p>
				<p>The disciple answered: “I believe in Zarathustra.” But Zarathustra shook his head and smiled.⁠—</p>
				<p>Belief doth not sanctify me, said he, least of all the belief in myself.</p>
				<p>But granting that some one did say in all seriousness that the poets lie too much: he was right⁠—<em>we</em> do lie too much.</p>
				<p>We also know too little, and are bad learners: so we are obliged to lie.</p>
				<p>And which of us poets hath not adulterated his wine? Many a poisonous hotchpotch hath evolved in our cellars: many an indescribable thing hath there been done.</p>
				<p>And because we know little, therefore are we pleased from the heart with the poor in spirit, especially when they are young women!</p>
				<p>And even of those things are we desirous, which old women tell one another in the evening. This do we call the eternally feminine in us.</p>
				<p>And as if there were a special secret access to knowledge, which <em>choketh up</em> for those who learn anything, so do we believe in the people and in their “wisdom.”</p>
				<p>This, however, do all poets believe: that whoever pricketh up his ears when lying in the grass or on lonely slopes, learneth something of the things that are betwixt heaven and earth.</p>
				<p>And if there come unto them tender emotions, then do the poets always think that nature herself is in love with them:</p>
				<p>And that she stealeth to their ear to whisper secrets into it, and amorous flatteries: of this do they plume and pride themselves, before all mortals!</p>
				<p>Ah, there are so many things betwixt heaven and earth of which only the poets have dreamed!</p>
				<p>And especially <em>above</em> the heavens: for all Gods are poet-symbolisations, poet-sophistications!</p>
				<p>Verily, ever are we drawn aloft⁠—that is, to the realm of the clouds: on these do we set our gaudy puppets, and then call them Gods and Supermen:⁠—</p>
				<p>Are not they light enough for those chairs!⁠—all these Gods and Supermen?⁠—</p>
				<p>Ah, how I am weary of all the inadequate that is insisted on as actual! Ah, how I am weary of the poets!</p>
				<p>When Zarathustra so spake, his disciple resented it, but was silent. And Zarathustra also was silent; and his eye directed itself inwardly, as if it gazed into the far distance. At last he sighed and drew breath.⁠—</p>
				<p>I am of to-day and heretofore, said he thereupon; but something is in me that is of the morrow, and the day following, and the hereafter.</p>
				<p>I became weary of the poets, of the old and of the new: superficial are they all unto me, and shallow seas.</p>
				<p>They did not think sufficiently into the depth; therefore their feeling did not reach to the bottom.</p>
				<p>Some sensation of voluptuousness and some sensation of tedium: these have as yet been their best contemplation.</p>
				<p>Ghost-breathing and ghost-whisking, seemeth to me all the jingle-jangling of their harps; what have they known hitherto of the fervour of tones!⁠—</p>
				<p>They are also not pure enough for me: they all muddle their water that it may seem deep.</p>
				<p>And fain would they thereby prove themselves reconcilers: but mediaries and mixers are they unto me, and half-and-half, and impure!⁠—</p>
				<p>Ah, I cast indeed my net into their sea, and meant to catch good fish; but always did I draw up the head of some ancient God.</p>
				<p>Thus did the sea give a stone to the hungry one. And they themselves may well originate from the sea.</p>
				<p>Certainly, one findeth pearls in them: thereby they are the more like hard molluscs. And instead of a soul, I have often found in them salt slime.</p>
				<p>They have learned from the sea also its vanity: is not the sea the peacock of peacocks?</p>
				<p>Even before the ugliest of all buffaloes doth it spread out its tail; never doth it tire of its lace-fan of silver and silk.</p>
				<p>Disdainfully doth the buffalo glance thereat, nigh to the sand with its soul, nigher still to the thicket, nighest, however, to the swamp.</p>
				<p>What is beauty and sea and peacock-splendour to it! This parable I speak unto the poets.</p>
				<p>Verily, their spirit itself is the peacock of peacocks, and a sea of vanity!</p>
				<p>Spectators, seeketh the spirit of the poet⁠—should they even be buffaloes!⁠—</p>
				<p>But of this spirit became I weary; and I see the time coming when it will become weary of itself.</p>
				<p>Yea, changed have I seen the poets, and their glance turned towards themselves.</p>
				<p>Penitents of the spirit have I seen appearing; they grew out of the poets.⁠—</p>
				<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
