<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXI: The Night-Song</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">The Night-Song</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>’Tis night: now do all gushing fountains speak louder. And my soul also is a gushing fountain.</p>
				<p>’Tis night: now only do all songs of the loving ones awake. And my soul also is the song of a loving one.</p>
				<p>Something unappeased, unappeasable, is within me; it longeth to find expression. A craving for love is within me, which speaketh itself the language of love.</p>
				<p>Light am I: ah, that I were night! But it is my lonesomeness to be begirt with light!</p>
				<p>Ah, that I were dark and nightly! How would I suck at the breasts of light!</p>
				<p>And you yourselves would I bless, ye twinkling starlets and glow-worms aloft!⁠—and would rejoice in the gifts of your light.</p>
				<p>But I live in mine own light, I drink again into myself the flames that break forth from me.</p>
				<p>I know not the happiness of the receiver; and oft have I dreamt that stealing must be more blessed than receiving.</p>
				<p>It is my poverty that my hand never ceaseth bestowing; it is mine envy that I see waiting eyes and the brightened nights of longing.</p>
				<p>Oh, the misery of all bestowers! Oh, the darkening of my sun! Oh, the craving to crave! Oh, the violent hunger in satiety!</p>
				<p>They take from me: but do I yet touch their soul? There is a gap ’twixt giving and receiving; and the smallest gap hath finally to be bridged over.</p>
				<p>A hunger ariseth out of my beauty: I should like to injure those I illumine; I should like to rob those I have gifted:⁠—thus do I hunger for wickedness.</p>
				<p>Withdrawing my hand when another hand already stretcheth out to it; hesitating like the cascade, which hesitateth even in its leap:⁠—thus do I hunger for wickedness!</p>
				<p>Such revenge doth mine abundance think of: such mischief welleth out of my lonesomeness.</p>
				<p>My happiness in bestowing died in bestowing; my virtue became weary of itself by its abundance!</p>
				<p>He who ever bestoweth is in danger of losing his shame; to him who ever dispenseth, the hand and heart become callous by very dispensing.</p>
				<p>Mine eye no longer overfloweth for the shame of suppliants; my hand hath become too hard for the trembling of filled hands.</p>
				<p>Whence have gone the tears of mine eye, and the down of my heart? Oh, the lonesomeness of all bestowers! Oh, the silence of all shining ones!</p>
				<p>Many suns circle in desert space: to all that is dark do they speak with their light⁠—but to me they are silent.</p>
				<p>Oh, this is the hostility of light to the shining one: unpityingly doth it pursue its course.</p>
				<p>Unfair to the shining one in its innermost heart, cold to the suns:⁠—thus travelleth every sun.</p>
				<p>Like a storm do the suns pursue their courses: that is their travelling. Their inexorable will do they follow: that is their coldness.</p>
				<p>Oh, ye only is it, ye dark, nightly ones, that extract warmth from the shining ones! Oh, ye only drink milk and refreshment from the light’s udders!</p>
				<p>Ah, there is ice around me; my hand burneth with the iciness! Ah, there is thirst in me; it panteth after your thirst!</p>
				<p>’Tis night: alas, that I have to be light! And thirst for the nightly! And lonesomeness!</p>
				<p>’Tis night: now doth my longing break forth in me as a fountain⁠—for speech do I long.</p>
				<p>’Tis night: now do all gushing fountains speak louder. And my soul also is a gushing fountain.</p>
				<p>’Tis night: now do all songs of loving ones awake. And my soul also is the song of a loving one.⁠—</p>
				<p>Thus sang Zarathustra.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
