<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXX. THE FAMOUS WISE ONES.</h2>
			<p>The people have ye served and the people’s superstition—NOT the truth!—all ye famous wise ones! And just on that account did they pay you reverence.</p>
			<p>And on that account also did they tolerate your unbelief, because it was a pleasantry and a by-path for the people. Thus doth the master give free scope to his slaves, and even enjoyeth their presumptuousness.</p>
			<p>But he who is hated by the people, as the wolf by the dogs—is the free spirit, the enemy of fetters, the non-adorer, the dweller in the woods.</p>
			<p>To hunt him out of his lair—that was always called “sense of right” by the people: on him do they still hound their sharpest-toothed dogs.</p>
			<p>“For there the truth is, where the people are! Woe, woe to the seeking ones!”—thus hath it echoed through all time.</p>
			<p>Your people would ye justify in their reverence: that called ye “Will to Truth,” ye famous wise ones!</p>
			<p>And your heart hath always said to itself: “From the people have I come: from thence came to me also the voice of God.”</p>
			<p>Stiff-necked and artful, like the ass, have ye always been, as the advocates of the people.</p>
			<p>And many a powerful one who wanted to run well with the people, hath harnessed in front of his horses—a donkey, a famous wise man.</p>
			<p>And now, ye famous wise ones, I would have you finally throw off entirely the skin of the lion!</p>
			<p>The skin of the beast of prey, the speckled skin, and the dishevelled locks of the investigator, the searcher, and the conqueror!</p>
			<p>Ah! for me to learn to believe in your “conscientiousness,” ye would first have to break your venerating will.</p>
			<p>Conscientious—so call I him who goeth into God-forsaken wildernesses, and hath broken his venerating heart.</p>
			<p>In the yellow sands and burnt by the sun, he doubtless peereth thirstily at the isles rich in fountains, where life reposeth under shady trees.</p>
			<p>But his thirst doth not persuade him to become like those comfortable ones: for where there are oases, there are also idols.</p>
			<p>Hungry, fierce, lonesome, God-forsaken: so doth the lion-will wish itself.</p>
			<p>Free from the happiness of slaves, redeemed from Deities and adorations, fearless and fear-inspiring, grand and lonesome: so is the will of the conscientious.</p>
			<p>In the wilderness have ever dwelt the conscientious, the free spirits, as lords of the wilderness; but in the cities dwell the well-foddered, famous wise ones—the draught-beasts.</p>
			<p>For, always, do they draw, as asses—the PEOPLE’S carts!</p>
			<p>Not that I on that account upbraid them: but serving ones do they remain, and harnessed ones, even though they glitter in golden harness.</p>
			<p>And often have they been good servants and worthy of their hire. For thus saith virtue: “If thou must be a servant, seek him unto whom thy service is most useful!</p>
			<p>The spirit and virtue of thy master shall advance by thou being his servant: thus wilt thou thyself advance with his spirit and virtue!”</p>
			<p>And verily, ye famous wise ones, ye servants of the people! Ye yourselves have advanced with the people’s spirit and virtue—and the people by you! To your honour do I say it!</p>
			<p>But the people ye remain for me, even with your virtues, the people with purblind eyes—the people who know not what SPIRIT is!</p>
			<p>Spirit is life which itself cutteth into life: by its own torture doth it increase its own knowledge,—did ye know that before?</p>
			<p>And the spirit’s happiness is this: to be anointed and consecrated with tears as a sacrificial victim,—did ye know that before?</p>
			<p>And the blindness of the blind one, and his seeking and groping, shall yet testify to the power of the sun into which he hath gazed,—did ye know that before?</p>
			<p>And with mountains shall the discerning one learn to BUILD! It is a small thing for the spirit to remove mountains,—did ye know that before?</p>
			<p>Ye know only the sparks of the spirit: but ye do not see the anvil which it is, and the cruelty of its hammer!</p>
			<p>Verily, ye know not the spirit’s pride! But still less could ye endure the spirit’s humility, should it ever want to speak!</p>
			<p>And never yet could ye cast your spirit into a pit of snow: ye are not hot enough for that! Thus are ye unaware, also, of the delight of its coldness.</p>
			<p>In all respects, however, ye make too familiar with the spirit; and out of wisdom have ye often made an almshouse and a hospital for bad poets.</p>
			<p>Ye are not eagles: thus have ye never experienced the happiness of the alarm of the spirit. And he who is not a bird should not camp above abysses.</p>
			<p>Ye seem to me lukewarm ones: but coldly floweth all deep knowledge. Ice-cold are the innermost wells of the spirit: a refreshment to hot hands and handlers.</p>
			<p>Respectable do ye there stand, and stiff, and with straight backs, ye famous wise ones!—no strong wind or will impelleth you.</p>
			<p>Have ye ne’er seen a sail crossing the sea, rounded and inflated, and trembling with the violence of the wind?</p>
			<p>Like the sail trembling with the violence of the spirit, doth my wisdom cross the sea—my wild wisdom!</p>
			<p>But ye servants of the people, ye famous wise ones—how COULD ye go with me!—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
