<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Sublime Ones</h2>
			<p>Calm is the bottom of my sea: who would guess that it hideth droll monsters!</p>
			<p>Unmoved is my depth: but it sparkleth with swimming enigmas and laughters.</p>
			<p>A sublime one saw I to-day, a solemn one, a penitent of the spirit: Oh, how my soul laughed at his ugliness!</p>
			<p>With upraised breast, and like those who draw in their breath: thus did he stand, the sublime one, and in silence:</p>
			<p>O’erhung with ugly truths, the spoil of his hunting, and rich in torn raiment; many thorns also hung on him⁠—but I saw no rose.</p>
			<p>Not yet had he learned laughing and beauty. Gloomy did this hunter return from the forest of knowledge.</p>
			<p>From the fight with wild beasts returned he home: but even yet a wild beast gazeth out of his seriousness⁠—an unconquered wild beast!</p>
			<p>As a tiger doth he ever stand, on the point of springing; but I do not like those strained souls; ungracious is my taste towards all those self-engrossed ones.</p>
			<p>And ye tell me, friends, that there is to be no dispute about taste and tasting? But all life is a dispute about taste and tasting!</p>
			<p>Taste: that is weight at the same time, and scales and weigher; and alas for every living thing that would live without dispute about weight and scales and weigher!</p>
			<p>Should he become weary of his sublimeness, this sublime one, then only will his beauty begin⁠—and then only will I taste him and find him savoury.</p>
			<p>And only when he turneth away from himself will he o’erleap his own shadow⁠—and verily! into HIS sun.</p>
			<p>Far too long did he sit in the shade; the cheeks of the penitent of the spirit became pale; he almost starved on his expectations.</p>
			<p>Contempt is still in his eye, and loathing hideth in his mouth. To be sure, he now resteth, but he hath not yet taken rest in the sunshine.</p>
			<p>As the ox ought he to do; and his happiness should smell of the earth, and not of contempt for the earth.</p>
			<p>As a white ox would I like to see him, which, snorting and lowing, walketh before the plough-share: and his lowing should also laud all that is earthly!</p>
			<p>Dark is still his countenance; the shadow of his hand danceth upon it. O’ershadowed is still the sense of his eye.</p>
			<p>His deed itself is still the shadow upon him: his doing obscureth the doer. Not yet hath he overcome his deed.</p>
			<p>To be sure, I love in him the shoulders of the ox: but now do I want to see also the eye of the angel.</p>
			<p>Also his hero-will hath he still to unlearn: an exalted one shall he be, and not only a sublime one:⁠—the ether itself should raise him, the will-less one!</p>
			<p>He hath subdued monsters, he hath solved enigmas. But he should also redeem his monsters and enigmas; into heavenly children should he transform them.</p>
			<p>As yet hath his knowledge not learned to smile, and to be without jealousy; as yet hath his gushing passion not become calm in beauty.</p>
			<p>Verily, not in satiety shall his longing cease and disappear, but in beauty! Gracefulness belongeth to the munificence of the magnanimous.</p>
			<p>His arm across his head: thus should the hero repose; thus should he also surmount his repose.</p>
			<p>But precisely to the hero is BEAUTY the hardest thing of all. Unattainable is beauty by all ardent wills.</p>
			<p>A little more, a little less: precisely this is much here, it is the most here.</p>
			<p>To stand with relaxed muscles and with unharnessed will: that is the hardest for all of you, ye sublime ones!</p>
			<p>When power becometh gracious and descendeth into the visible⁠—I call such condescension, beauty.</p>
			<p>And from no one do I want beauty so much as from thee, thou powerful one: let thy goodness be thy last self-conquest.</p>
			<p>All evil do I accredit to thee: therefore do I desire of thee the good.</p>
			<p>Verily, I have often laughed at the weaklings, who think themselves good because they have crippled paws!</p>
			<p>The virtue of the pillar shalt thou strive after: more beautiful doth it ever become, and more graceful⁠—but internally harder and more sustaining⁠—the higher it riseth.</p>
			<p>Yea, thou sublime one, one day shalt thou also be beautiful, and hold up the mirror to thine own beauty.</p>
			<p>Then will thy soul thrill with divine desires; and there will be adoration even in thy vanity!</p>
			<p>For this is the secret of the soul: when the hero hath abandoned it, then only approacheth it in dreams⁠—the superhero.⁠—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
