<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XI. THE NEW IDOL.</h2>
			<p>Somewhere there are still peoples and herds, but not with us, my brethren: here there are states.</p>
			<p>A state? What is that? Well! open now your ears unto me, for now will I say unto you my word concerning the death of peoples.</p>
			<p>A state, is called the coldest of all cold monsters. Coldly lieth it also; and this lie creepeth from its mouth: “I, the state, am the people.”</p>
			<p>It is a lie! Creators were they who created peoples, and hung a faith and a love over them: thus they served life.</p>
			<p>Destroyers, are they who lay snares for many, and call it the state: they hang a sword and a hundred cravings over them.</p>
			<p>Where there is still a people, there the state is not understood, but hated as the evil eye, and as sin against laws and customs.</p>
			<p>This sign I give unto you: every people speaketh its language of good and evil: this its neighbour understandeth not. Its language hath it devised for itself in laws and customs.</p>
			<p>But the state lieth in all languages of good and evil; and whatever it saith it lieth; and whatever it hath it hath stolen.</p>
			<p>False is everything in it; with stolen teeth it biteth, the biting one. False are even its bowels.</p>
			<p>Confusion of language of good and evil; this sign I give unto you as the sign of the state. Verily, the will to death, indicateth this sign! Verily, it beckoneth unto the preachers of death!</p>
			<p>Many too many are born: for the superfluous ones was the state devised!</p>
			<p>See just how it enticeth them to it, the many-too-many! How it swalloweth and cheweth and recheweth them!</p>
			<p>“On earth there is nothing greater than I: it is I who am the regulating finger of God”—thus roareth the monster. And not only the long-eared and short-sighted fall upon their knees!</p>
			<p>Ah! even in your ears, ye great souls, it whispereth its gloomy lies! Ah! it findeth out the rich hearts which willingly lavish themselves!</p>
			<p>Yea, it findeth you out too, ye conquerors of the old God! Weary ye became of the conflict, and now your weariness serveth the new idol!</p>
			<p>Heroes and honourable ones, it would fain set up around it, the new idol! Gladly it basketh in the sunshine of good consciences,—the cold monster!</p>
			<p>Everything will it give YOU, if YE worship it, the new idol: thus it purchaseth the lustre of your virtue, and the glance of your proud eyes.</p>
			<p>It seeketh to allure by means of you, the many-too-many! Yea, a hellish artifice hath here been devised, a death-horse jingling with the trappings of divine honours!</p>
			<p>Yea, a dying for many hath here been devised, which glorifieth itself as life: verily, a hearty service unto all preachers of death!</p>
			<p>The state, I call it, where all are poison-drinkers, the good and the bad: the state, where all lose themselves, the good and the bad: the state, where the slow suicide of all—is called “life.”</p>
			<p>Just see these superfluous ones! They steal the works of the inventors and the treasures of the wise. Culture, they call their theft—and everything becometh sickness and trouble unto them!</p>
			<p>Just see these superfluous ones! Sick are they always; they vomit their bile and call it a newspaper. They devour one another, and cannot even digest themselves.</p>
			<p>Just see these superfluous ones! Wealth they acquire and become poorer thereby. Power they seek for, and above all, the lever of power, much money—these impotent ones!</p>
			<p>See them clamber, these nimble apes! They clamber over one another, and thus scuffle into the mud and the abyss.</p>
			<p>Towards the throne they all strive: it is their madness—as if happiness sat on the throne! Ofttimes sitteth filth on the throne.—and ofttimes also the throne on filth.</p>
			<p>Madmen they all seem to me, and clambering apes, and too eager. Badly smelleth their idol to me, the cold monster: badly they all smell to me, these idolaters.</p>
			<p>My brethren, will ye suffocate in the fumes of their maws and appetites! Better break the windows and jump into the open air!</p>
			<p>Do go out of the way of the bad odour! Withdraw from the idolatry of the superfluous!</p>
			<p>Do go out of the way of the bad odour! Withdraw from the steam of these human sacrifices!</p>
			<p>Open still remaineth the earth for great souls. Empty are still many sites for lone ones and twain ones, around which floateth the odour of tranquil seas.</p>
			<p>Open still remaineth a free life for great souls. Verily, he who possesseth little is so much the less possessed: blessed be moderate poverty!</p>
			<p>There, where the state ceaseth—there only commenceth the man who is not superfluous: there commenceth the song of the necessary ones, the single and irreplaceable melody.</p>
			<p>There, where the state CEASETH—pray look thither, my brethren! Do ye not see it, the rainbow and the bridges of the Superman?—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
