<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X: War and Warriors</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">War and Warriors</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>By our best enemies we do not want to be spared, nor by those either whom we love from the very heart. So let me tell you the truth!</p>
				<p>My brethren in war! I love you from the very heart. I am, and was ever, your counterpart. And I am also your best enemy. So let me tell you the truth!</p>
				<p>I know the hatred and envy of your hearts. Ye are not great enough not to know of hatred and envy. Then be great enough not to be ashamed of them!</p>
				<p>And if ye cannot be saints of knowledge, then, I pray you, be at least its warriors. They are the companions and forerunners of such saintship.</p>
				<p>I see many soldiers; could I but see many warriors! “Uniform” one calleth what they wear; may it not be uniform what they therewith hide!</p>
				<p>Ye shall be those whose eyes ever seek for an enemy⁠—for <em>your</em> enemy. And with some of you there is hatred at first sight.</p>
				<p>Your enemy shall ye seek; your war shall ye wage, and for the sake of your thoughts! And if your thoughts succumb, your uprightness shall still shout triumph thereby!</p>
				<p>Ye shall love peace as a means to new wars⁠—and the short peace more than the long.</p>
				<p>You I advise not to work, but to fight. You I advise not to peace, but to victory. Let your work be a fight, let your peace be a victory!</p>
				<p>One can only be silent and sit peacefully when one hath arrow and bow; otherwise one prateth and quarrelleth. Let your peace be a victory!</p>
				<p>Ye say it is the good cause which halloweth even war? I say unto you: it is the good war which halloweth every cause.</p>
				<p>War and courage have done more great things than charity. Not your sympathy, but your bravery hath hitherto saved the victims.</p>
				<p>“What is good?” ye ask. To be brave is good. Let the little girls say: “To be good is what is pretty, and at the same time touching.”</p>
				<p>They call you heartless: but your heart is true, and I love the bashfulness of your goodwill. Ye are ashamed of your flow, and others are ashamed of their ebb.</p>
				<p>Ye are ugly? Well then, my brethren, take the sublime about you, the mantle of the ugly!</p>
				<p>And when your soul becometh great, then doth it become haughty, and in your sublimity there is wickedness. I know you.</p>
				<p>In wickedness the haughty man and the weakling meet. But they misunderstand one another. I know you.</p>
				<p>Ye shall only have enemies to be hated, but not enemies to be despised. Ye must be proud of your enemies; then, the successes of your enemies are also your successes.</p>
				<p>Resistance⁠—that is the distinction of the slave. Let your distinction be obedience. Let your commanding itself be obeying!</p>
				<p>To the good warrior soundeth “thou shalt” pleasanter than “I will.” And all that is dear unto you, ye shall first have it commanded unto you.</p>
				<p>Let your love to life be love to your highest hope; and let your highest hope be the highest thought of life!</p>
				<p>Your highest thought, however, ye shall have it commanded unto you by me⁠—and it is this: man is something that is to be surpassed.</p>
				<p>So live your life of obedience and of war! What matter about long life! What warrior wisheth to be spared!</p>
				<p>I spare you not, I love you from my very heart, my brethren in war!⁠—</p>
				<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
