<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVII: The Way of the Creating One</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">The Way of the Creating One</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Wouldst thou go into isolation, my brother? Wouldst thou seek the way unto thyself? Tarry yet a little and hearken unto me.</p>
				<p>“He who seeketh may easily get lost himself. All isolation is wrong”: so say the herd. And long didst thou belong to the herd.</p>
				<p>The voice of the herd will still echo in thee. And when thou sayest, “I have no longer a conscience in common with you,” then will it be a plaint and a pain.</p>
				<p>Lo, that pain itself did the same conscience produce; and the last gleam of that conscience still gloweth on thine affliction.</p>
				<p>But thou wouldst go the way of thine affliction, which is the way unto thyself? Then show me thine authority and thy strength to do so!</p>
				<p>Art thou a new strength and a new authority? A first motion? A self-rolling wheel? Canst thou also compel stars to revolve around thee?</p>
				<p>Alas! there is so much lusting for loftiness! There are so many convulsions of the ambitions! Show me that thou art not a lusting and ambitious one!</p>
				<p>Alas! there are so many great thoughts that do nothing more than the bellows: they inflate, and make emptier than ever.</p>
				<p>Free, dost thou call thyself? Thy ruling thought would I hear of, and not that thou hast escaped from a yoke.</p>
				<p>Art thou one <em>entitled</em> to escape from a yoke? Many a one hath cast away his final worth when he hath cast away his servitude.</p>
				<p>Free from what? What doth that matter to Zarathustra! Clearly, however, shall thine eye show unto me: free <em>for what</em>?</p>
				<p>Canst thou give unto thyself thy bad and thy good, and set up thy will as a law over thee? Canst thou be judge for thyself, and avenger of thy law?</p>
				<p>Terrible is aloneness with the judge and avenger of one’s own law. Thus is a star projected into desert space, and into the icy breath of aloneness.</p>
				<p>Today sufferest thou still from the multitude, thou individual; today hast thou still thy courage unabated, and thy hopes.</p>
				<p>But one day will the solitude weary thee; one day will thy pride yield, and thy courage quail. Thou wilt one day cry: “I am alone!”</p>
				<p>One day wilt thou see no longer thy loftiness, and see too closely thy lowliness; thy sublimity itself will frighten thee as a phantom. Thou wilt one day cry: “All is false!”</p>
				<p>There are feelings which seek to slay the lonesome one; if they do not succeed, then must they themselves die! But art thou capable of it⁠—to be a murderer?</p>
				<p>Hast thou ever known, my brother, the word “disdain”? And the anguish of thy justice in being just to those that disdain thee?</p>
				<p>Thou forcest many to think differently about thee; that, charge they heavily to thine account. Thou camest nigh unto them, and yet wentest past: for that they never forgive thee.</p>
				<p>Thou goest beyond them: but the higher thou risest, the smaller doth the eye of envy see thee. Most of all, however, is the flying one hated.</p>
				<p>“How could ye be just unto me!”⁠—must thou say⁠—“I choose your injustice as my allotted portion.”</p>
				<p>Injustice and filth cast they at the lonesome one: but, my brother, if thou wouldst be a star, thou must shine for them none the less on that account!</p>
				<p>And be on thy guard against the good and just! They would fain crucify those who devise their own virtue⁠—they hate the lonesome ones.</p>
				<p>Be on thy guard, also, against holy simplicity! All is unholy to it that is not simple; fain, likewise, would it play with the fire⁠—of the fagot and stake.</p>
				<p>And be on thy guard, also, against the assaults of thy love! Too readily doth the recluse reach his hand to anyone who meeteth him.</p>
				<p>To many a one mayest thou not give thy hand, but only thy paw; and I wish thy paw also to have claws.</p>
				<p>But the worst enemy thou canst meet, wilt thou thyself always be; thou waylayest thyself in caverns and forests.</p>
				<p>Thou lonesome one, thou goest the way to thyself! And past thyself and thy seven devils leadeth thy way!</p>
				<p>A heretic wilt thou be to thyself, and a wizard and a soothsayer, and a fool, and a doubter, and a reprobate, and a villain.</p>
				<p>Ready must thou be to burn thyself in thine own flame; how couldst thou become new if thou have not first become ashes!</p>
				<p>Thou lonesome one, thou goest the way of the creating one: a God wilt thou create for thyself out of thy seven devils!</p>
				<p>Thou lonesome one, thou goest the way of the loving one: thou lovest thyself, and on that account despisest thou thyself, as only the loving ones despise.</p>
				<p>To create, desireth the loving one, because he despiseth! What knoweth he of love who hath not been obliged to despise just what he loved!</p>
				<p>With thy love, go into thine isolation, my brother, and with thy creating; and late only will justice limp after thee.</p>
				<p>With my tears, go into thine isolation, my brother. I love him who seeketh to create beyond himself, and thus succumbeth.⁠—</p>
				<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
