<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LIX: The Second Dance-Song</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-59" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">The Second Dance-Song</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<section id="chapter-59-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
					<p>“Into thine eyes gazed I lately, O Life: gold saw I gleam in thy night-eyes⁠—my heart stood still with delight:</p>
					<p>—A golden bark saw I gleam on darkened waters, a sinking, drinking, reblinking, golden swing-bark!</p>
					<p>At my dance-frantic foot, dost thou cast a glance, a laughing, questioning, melting, thrown glance:</p>
					<p>Twice only movedst thou thy rattle with thy little hands⁠—then did my feet swing with dance-fury.⁠—</p>
					<p>My heels reared aloft, my toes they hearkened⁠—thee they would know: hath not the dancer his ear⁠—in his toe!</p>
					<p>Unto thee did I spring: then fledst thou back from my bound; and towards me waved thy fleeing, flying tresses round!</p>
					<p>Away from thee did I spring, and from thy snaky tresses: then stoodst thou there half-turned, and in thine eye caresses.</p>
					<p>With crooked glances⁠—dost thou teach me crooked courses; on crooked courses learn my feet⁠—crafty fancies!</p>
					<p>I fear thee near, I love thee far; thy flight allureth me, thy seeking secureth me:⁠—I suffer, but for thee, what would I not gladly bear!</p>
					<p>For thee, whose coldness inflameth, whose hatred misleadeth, whose flight enchaineth, whose mockery⁠—pleadeth:</p>
					<p>—Who would not hate thee, thou great bindress, inwindress, temptress, seekress, findress! Who would not love thee, thou innocent, impatient, wind-swift, child-eyed sinner!</p>
					<p>Whither pullest thou me now, thou paragon and tomboy? And now foolest thou me fleeing; thou sweet romp dost annoy!</p>
					<p>I dance after thee, I follow even faint traces lonely. Where art thou? Give me thy hand! Or thy finger only!</p>
					<p>Here are caves and thickets: we shall go astray!⁠—Halt! Stand still! Seest thou not owls and bats in fluttering fray?</p>
					<p>Thou bat! Thou owl! Thou wouldst play me foul? Where are we? From the dogs hast thou learned thus to bark and howl.</p>
					<p>Thou gnashest on me sweetly with little white teeth; thine evil eyes shoot out upon me, thy curly little mane from underneath!</p>
					<p>This is a dance over stock and stone: I am the hunter⁠—wilt thou be my hound, or my chamois anon?</p>
					<p>Now beside me! And quickly, wickedly springing! Now up! And over!⁠—Alas! I have fallen myself overswinging!</p>
					<p>Oh, see me lying, thou arrogant one, and imploring grace! Gladly would I walk with thee⁠—in some lovelier place!</p>
					<p>—In the paths of love, through bushes variegated, quiet, trim! Or there along the lake, where gold-fishes dance and swim!</p>
					<p>Thou art now a-weary? There above are sheep and sun-set stripes: is it not sweet to sleep⁠—the shepherd pipes?</p>
					<p>Thou art so very weary? I carry thee thither; let just thine arm sink! And art thou thirsty⁠—I should have something; but thy mouth would not like it to drink!⁠—</p>
					<p>—Oh, that cursed, nimble, supple serpent and lurking-witch! Where art thou gone? But in my face do I feel through thy hand, two spots and red blotches itch!</p>
					<p>I am verily weary of it, ever thy sheepish shepherd to be. Thou witch, if I have hitherto sung unto thee, now shalt <em>thou</em>⁠—cry unto me!</p>
					<p>To the rhythm of my whip shalt thou dance and cry! I forget not my whip?⁠—Not I!”⁠—</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-59-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
					<p>Then did Life answer me thus, and kept thereby her fine ears closed:</p>
					<p>“O Zarathustra! Crack not so terribly with thy whip! Thou knowest surely that noise killeth thought⁠—and just now there came to me such delicate thoughts.</p>
					<p>We are both of us genuine ne’er-do-wells and ne’er-do-ills. Beyond good and evil found we our island and our green meadow⁠—we two alone! Therefore must we be friendly to each other!</p>
					<p>And even should we not love each other from the bottom of our hearts⁠—must we then have a grudge against each other if we do not love each other perfectly?</p>
					<p>And that I am friendly to thee, and often too friendly, that knowest thou: and the reason is that I am envious of thy Wisdom. Ah, this mad old fool, Wisdom!</p>
					<p>If thy Wisdom should one day run away from thee, ah! then would also my love run away from thee quickly.”⁠—</p>
					<p>Thereupon did Life look thoughtfully behind and around, and said softly: “O Zarathustra, thou art not faithful enough to me!</p>
					<p>Thou lovest me not nearly so much as thou sayest; I know thou thinkest of soon leaving me.</p>
					<p>There is an old heavy, heavy, booming-clock: it boometh by night up to thy cave:⁠—</p>
					<p>—When thou hearest this clock strike the hours at midnight, then thinkest thou between one and twelve thereon⁠—</p>
					<p>—Thou thinkest thereon, O Zarathustra, I know it⁠—of soon leaving me!”⁠—</p>
					<p>“Yea,” answered I, hesitatingly, “but thou knowest it also”⁠—And I said something into her ear, in amongst her confused, yellow, foolish tresses.</p>
					<p>“Thou <em>knowest</em> that, O Zarathustra? That knoweth no one⁠—”</p>
					<p>And we gazed at each other, and looked at the green meadow o’er which the cool evening was just passing, and we wept together.⁠—Then, however, was Life dearer unto me than all my Wisdom had ever been.⁠—</p>
					<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-59-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
						<p>
							<span class="count">One!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O man! Take heed!</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="count">Two!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What saith deep midnight’s voice indeed?</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="count">Three!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>“I slept my sleep⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="count">Four!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>“From deepest dream I’ve woke and plead:⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="count">Five!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>“The world is deep,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="count">Six!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>“And deeper than the day could read.</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="count">Seven!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>“Deep is its woe⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="count">Eight!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>“Joy⁠—deeper still than grief can be:</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="count">Nine!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>“Woe saith: Hence! Go!</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="count">Ten!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>“But joys all want eternity⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="count">Eleven!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>“Want deep profound eternity!”</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="count">Twelve!</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
