<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVIII: Scholars</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-38" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">Scholars</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>When I lay asleep, then did a sheep eat at the ivy-wreath on my head⁠—it ate, and said thereby: “Zarathustra is no longer a scholar.”</p>
			<p>It said this, and went away clumsily and proudly. A child told it to me.</p>
			<p>I like to lie here where the children play, beside the ruined wall, among thistles and red poppies.</p>
			<p>A scholar am I still to the children, and also to the thistles and red poppies. Innocent are they, even in their wickedness.</p>
			<p>But to the sheep I am no longer a scholar: so willeth my lot⁠—blessings upon it!</p>
			<p>For this is the truth: I have departed from the house of the scholars, and the door have I also slammed behind me.</p>
			<p>Too long did my soul sit hungry at their table: not like them have I got the knack of investigating, as the knack of nut-cracking.</p>
			<p>Freedom do I love, and the air over fresh soil; rather would I sleep on ox-skins than on their honours and dignities.</p>
			<p>I am too hot and scorched with mine own thought: often is it ready to take away my breath. Then have I to go into the open air, and away from all dusty rooms.</p>
			<p>But they sit cool in the cool shade: they want in everything to be merely spectators, and they avoid sitting where the sun burneth on the steps.</p>
			<p>Like those who stand in the street and gape at the passersby: thus do they also wait, and gape at the thoughts which others have thought.</p>
			<p>Should one lay hold of them, then do they raise a dust like flour-sacks, and involuntarily: but who would divine that their dust came from corn, and from the yellow delight of the summer fields?</p>
			<p>When they give themselves out as wise, then do their petty sayings and truths chill me: in their wisdom there is often an odour as if it came from the swamp; and verily, I have even heard the frog croak in it!</p>
			<p>Clever are they⁠—they have dexterous fingers: what doth <em>my</em> simplicity pretend to beside their multiplicity! All threading and knitting and weaving do their fingers understand: thus do they make the hose of the spirit!</p>
			<p>Good clockworks are they: only be careful to wind them up properly! Then do they indicate the hour without mistake, and make a modest noise thereby.</p>
			<p>Like millstones do they work, and like pestles: throw only seed-corn unto them!⁠—they know well how to grind corn small, and make white dust out of it.</p>
			<p>They keep a sharp eye on one another, and do not trust each other the best. Ingenious in little artifices, they wait for those whose knowledge walketh on lame feet⁠—like spiders do they wait.</p>
			<p>I saw them always prepare their poison with precaution; and always did they put glass gloves on their fingers in doing so.</p>
			<p>They also know how to play with false dice; and so eagerly did I find them playing, that they perspired thereby.</p>
			<p>We are alien to each other, and their virtues are even more repugnant to my taste than their falsehoods and false dice.</p>
			<p>And when I lived with them, then did I live above them. Therefore did they take a dislike to me.</p>
			<p>They want to hear nothing of anyone walking above their heads; and so they put wood and earth and rubbish betwixt me and their heads.</p>
			<p>Thus did they deafen the sound of my tread: and least have I hitherto been heard by the most learned.</p>
			<p>All mankind’s faults and weaknesses did they put betwixt themselves and me:⁠—they call it “false ceiling” in their houses.</p>
			<p>But nevertheless I walk with my thoughts <em>above</em> their heads; and even should I walk on mine own errors, still would I be above them and their heads.</p>
			<p>For men are <em>not</em> equal: so speaketh justice. And what I will, <em>they</em> may not will!⁠—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
