<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX: The Preachers of Death</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Preachers of Death</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>There are preachers of death: and the earth is full of those to whom desistance from life must be preached.</p>
			<p>Full is the earth of the superfluous; marred is life by the many-too-many. May they be decoyed out of this life by the “life eternal”!</p>
			<p>“The yellow ones”: so are called the preachers of death, or “the black ones.” But I will show them unto you in other colours besides.</p>
			<p>There are the terrible ones who carry about in themselves the beast of prey, and have no choice except lusts or self-laceration. And even their lusts are self-laceration.</p>
			<p>They have not yet become men, those terrible ones: may they preach desistance from life, and pass away themselves!</p>
			<p>There are the spiritually consumptive ones: hardly are they born when they begin to die, and long for doctrines of lassitude and renunciation.</p>
			<p>They would fain be dead, and we should approve of their wish! Let us beware of awakening those dead ones, and of damaging those living coffins!</p>
			<p>They meet an invalid, or an old man, or a corpse⁠—and immediately they say: “Life is refuted!”</p>
			<p>But they only are refuted, and their eye, which seeth only one aspect of existence.</p>
			<p>Shrouded in thick melancholy, and eager for the little casualties that bring death: thus do they wait, and clench their teeth.</p>
			<p>Or else, they grasp at sweetmeats, and mock at their childishness thereby: they cling to their straw of life, and mock at their still clinging to it.</p>
			<p>Their wisdom speaketh thus: “A fool, he who remaineth alive; but so far are we fools! And that is the foolishest thing in life!”</p>
			<p>“Life is only suffering”: so say others, and lie not. Then see to it that <em>ye</em> cease! See to it that the life ceaseth which is only suffering!</p>
			<p>And let this be the teaching of your virtue: “Thou shalt slay thyself! Thou shalt steal away from thyself!”⁠—</p>
			<p>“Lust is sin,”⁠—so say some who preach death⁠—“let us go apart and beget no children!”</p>
			<p>“Giving birth is troublesome,”⁠—say others⁠—“why still give birth? One beareth only the unfortunate!” And they also are preachers of death.</p>
			<p>“Pity is necessary,”⁠—so saith a third party. “Take what I have! Take what I am! So much less doth life bind me!”</p>
			<p>Were they consistently pitiful, then would they make their neighbours sick of life. To be wicked⁠—that would be their true goodness.</p>
			<p>But they want to be rid of life; what care they if they bind others still faster with their chains and gifts!⁠—</p>
			<p>And ye also, to whom life is rough labour and disquiet, are ye not very tired of life? Are ye not very ripe for the sermon of death?</p>
			<p>All ye to whom rough labour is dear, and the rapid, new, and strange⁠—ye put up with yourselves badly; your diligence is flight, and the will to self-forgetfulness.</p>
			<p>If ye believed more in life, then would ye devote yourselves less to the momentary. But for waiting, ye have not enough of capacity in you⁠—nor even for idling!</p>
			<p>Everywhere resoundeth the voices of those who preach death; and the earth is full of those to whom death hath to be preached.</p>
			<p>Or “life eternal”; it is all the same to me⁠—if only they pass away quickly!⁠—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
