<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII: Chastity</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Chastity</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>I love the forest. It is bad to live in cities: there, there are too many of the lustful.</p>
			<p>Is it not better to fall into the hands of a murderer, than into the dreams of a lustful woman?</p>
			<p>And just look at these men: their eye saith it⁠—they know nothing better on earth than to lie with a woman.</p>
			<p>Filth is at the bottom of their souls; and alas! if their filth hath still spirit in it!</p>
			<p>Would that ye were perfect⁠—at least as animals! But to animals belongeth innocence.</p>
			<p>Do I counsel you to slay your instincts? I counsel you to innocence in your instincts.</p>
			<p>Do I counsel you to chastity? Chastity is a virtue with some, but with many almost a vice.</p>
			<p>These are continent, to be sure: but doggish lust looketh enviously out of all that they do.</p>
			<p>Even into the heights of their virtue and into their cold spirit doth this creature follow them, with its discord.</p>
			<p>And how nicely can doggish lust beg for a piece of spirit, when a piece of flesh is denied it!</p>
			<p>Ye love tragedies and all that breaketh the heart? But I am distrustful of your doggish lust.</p>
			<p>Ye have too cruel eyes, and ye look wantonly towards the sufferers. Hath not your lust just disguised itself and taken the name of fellow-suffering?</p>
			<p>And also this parable give I unto you: Not a few who meant to cast out their devil, went thereby into the swine themselves.</p>
			<p>To whom chastity is difficult, it is to be dissuaded: lest it become the road to hell⁠—to filth and lust of soul.</p>
			<p>Do I speak of filthy things? That is not the worst thing for me to do.</p>
			<p>Not when the truth is filthy, but when it is shallow, doth the discerning one go unwillingly into its waters.</p>
			<p>Verily, there are chaste ones from their very nature; they are gentler of heart, and laugh better and oftener than you.</p>
			<p>They laugh also at chastity, and ask: “What is chastity?</p>
			<p>“Is chastity not folly? But the folly came unto us, and not we unto it.</p>
			<p>“We offered that guest harbour and heart: now it dwelleth with us⁠—let it stay as long as it will!”⁠—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
