<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XLIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-49" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      XLIX. THE BEDWARFING VIRTUE.
    </h2>
    <h3>
      1.
    </h3>
    <p>
      When Zarathustra was again on the continent, he did not go straightway to
      his mountains and his cave, but made many wanderings and questionings, and
      ascertained this and that; so that he said of himself jestingly: “Lo, a
      river that floweth back unto its source in many windings!” For he wanted
      to learn what had taken place AMONG MEN during the interval: whether they
      had become greater or smaller. And once, when he saw a row of new houses,
      he marvelled, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      “What do these houses mean? Verily, no great soul put them up as its
      simile!
    </p>
    <p>
      Did perhaps a silly child take them out of its toy-box? Would that another
      child put them again into the box!
    </p>
    <p>
      And these rooms and chambers—can MEN go out and in there? They seem
      to be made for silk dolls; or for dainty-eaters, who perhaps let others
      eat with them.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And Zarathustra stood still and meditated. At last he said sorrowfully:
      “There hath EVERYTHING become smaller!
    </p>
    <p>
      Everywhere do I see lower doorways: he who is of MY type can still go
      therethrough, but—he must stoop!
    </p>
    <p>
      Oh, when shall I arrive again at my home, where I shall no longer have to
      stoop—shall no longer have to stoop BEFORE THE SMALL ONES!”—And
      Zarathustra sighed, and gazed into the distance.—
    </p>
    <p>
      The same day, however, he gave his discourse on the bedwarfing virtue.
    </p>
    <p>
      2.
    </p>
    <p>
      I pass through this people and keep mine eyes open: they do not forgive me
      for not envying their virtues.
    </p>
    <p>
      They bite at me, because I say unto them that for small people, small
      virtues are necessary—and because it is hard for me to understand
      that small people are NECESSARY!
    </p>
    <p>
      Here am I still like a cock in a strange farm-yard, at which even the hens
      peck: but on that account I am not unfriendly to the hens.
    </p>
    <p>
      I am courteous towards them, as towards all small annoyances; to be
      prickly towards what is small, seemeth to me wisdom for hedgehogs.
    </p>
    <p>
      They all speak of me when they sit around their fire in the evening—they
      speak of me, but no one thinketh—of me!
    </p>
    <p>
      This is the new stillness which I have experienced: their noise around me
      spreadeth a mantle over my thoughts.
    </p>
    <p>
      They shout to one another: “What is this gloomy cloud about to do to us?
      Let us see that it doth not bring a plague upon us!”
     </p>
    <p>
      And recently did a woman seize upon her child that was coming unto me:
      “Take the children away,” cried she, “such eyes scorch children’s souls.”
     </p>
    <p>
      They cough when I speak: they think coughing an objection to strong winds—they
      divine nothing of the boisterousness of my happiness!
    </p>
    <p>
      “We have not yet time for Zarathustra”—so they object; but what
      matter about a time that “hath no time” for Zarathustra?
    </p>
    <p>
      And if they should altogether praise me, how could I go to sleep on THEIR
      praise? A girdle of spines is their praise unto me: it scratcheth me even
      when I take it off.
    </p>
    <p>
      And this also did I learn among them: the praiser doeth as if he gave
      back; in truth, however, he wanteth more to be given him!
    </p>
    <p>
      Ask my foot if their lauding and luring strains please it! Verily, to such
      measure and ticktack, it liketh neither to dance nor to stand still.
    </p>
    <p>
      To small virtues would they fain lure and laud me; to the ticktack of
      small happiness would they fain persuade my foot.
    </p>
    <p>
      I pass through this people and keep mine eyes open; they have become
      SMALLER, and ever become smaller:—THE REASON THEREOF IS THEIR
      DOCTRINE OF HAPPINESS AND VIRTUE.
    </p>
    <p>
      For they are moderate also in virtue,—because they want comfort.
      With comfort, however, moderate virtue only is compatible.
    </p>
    <p>
      To be sure, they also learn in their way to stride on and stride forward:
      that, I call their HOBBLING.—Thereby they become a hindrance to all
      who are in haste.
    </p>
    <p>
      And many of them go forward, and look backwards thereby, with stiffened
      necks: those do I like to run up against.
    </p>
    <p>
      Foot and eye shall not lie, nor give the lie to each other. But there is
      much lying among small people.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some of them WILL, but most of them are WILLED. Some of them are genuine,
      but most of them are bad actors.
    </p>
    <p>
      There are actors without knowing it amongst them, and actors without
      intending it—, the genuine ones are always rare, especially the
      genuine actors.
    </p>
    <p>
      Of man there is little here: therefore do their women masculinise
      themselves. For only he who is man enough, will—SAVE THE WOMAN in
      woman.
    </p>
    <p>
      And this hypocrisy found I worst amongst them, that even those who command
      feign the virtues of those who serve.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I serve, thou servest, we serve”—so chanteth here even the
      hypocrisy of the rulers—and alas! if the first lord be ONLY the
      first servant!
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah, even upon their hypocrisy did mine eyes’ curiosity alight; and well
      did I divine all their fly-happiness, and their buzzing around sunny
      window-panes.
    </p>
    <p>
      So much kindness, so much weakness do I see. So much justice and pity, so
      much weakness.
    </p>
    <p>
      Round, fair, and considerate are they to one another, as grains of sand
      are round, fair, and considerate to grains of sand.
    </p>
    <p>
      Modestly to embrace a small happiness—that do they call
      “submission”! and at the same time they peer modestly after a new small
      happiness.
    </p>
    <p>
      In their hearts they want simply one thing most of all: that no one hurt
      them. Thus do they anticipate every one’s wishes and do well unto every
      one.
    </p>
    <p>
      That, however, is COWARDICE, though it be called “virtue.”—
    </p>
    <p>
      And when they chance to speak harshly, those small people, then do <i>I</i>
      hear therein only their hoarseness—every draught of air maketh them
      hoarse.
    </p>
    <p>
      Shrewd indeed are they, their virtues have shrewd fingers. But they lack
      fists: their fingers do not know how to creep behind fists.
    </p>
    <p>
      Virtue for them is what maketh modest and tame: therewith have they made
      the wolf a dog, and man himself man’s best domestic animal.
    </p>
    <p>
      “We set our chair in the MIDST”—so saith their smirking unto me—“and
      as far from dying gladiators as from satisfied swine.”
     </p>
    <p>
      That, however, is—MEDIOCRITY, though it be called moderation.—
    </p>
    <p>
      3.
    </p>
    <p>
      I pass through this people and let fall many words: but they know neither
      how to take nor how to retain them.
    </p>
    <p>
      They wonder why I came not to revile venery and vice; and verily, I came
      not to warn against pickpockets either!
    </p>
    <p>
      They wonder why I am not ready to abet and whet their wisdom: as if they
      had not yet enough of wiseacres, whose voices grate on mine ear like
      slate-pencils!
    </p>
    <p>
      And when I call out: “Curse all the cowardly devils in you, that would
      fain whimper and fold the hands and adore”—then do they shout:
      “Zarathustra is godless.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And especially do their teachers of submission shout this;—but
      precisely in their ears do I love to cry: “Yea! I AM Zarathustra, the
      godless!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Those teachers of submission! Wherever there is aught puny, or sickly, or
      scabby, there do they creep like lice; and only my disgust preventeth me
      from cracking them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well! This is my sermon for THEIR ears: I am Zarathustra the godless, who
      saith: “Who is more godless than I, that I may enjoy his teaching?”
     </p>
    <p>
      I am Zarathustra the godless: where do I find mine equal? And all those
      are mine equals who give unto themselves their Will, and divest themselves
      of all submission.
    </p>
    <p>
      I am Zarathustra the godless! I cook every chance in MY pot. And only when
      it hath been quite cooked do I welcome it as MY food.
    </p>
    <p>
      And verily, many a chance came imperiously unto me: but still more
      imperiously did my WILL speak unto it,—then did it lie imploringly
      upon its knees—
    </p>
    <p>
      —Imploring that it might find home and heart with me, and saying
      flatteringly: “See, O Zarathustra, how friend only cometh unto friend!”—
    </p>
    <p>
      But why talk I, when no one hath MINE ears! And so will I shout it out
      unto all the winds:
    </p>
    <p>
      Ye ever become smaller, ye small people! Ye crumble away, ye comfortable
      ones! Ye will yet perish—
    </p>
    <p>
      —By your many small virtues, by your many small omissions, and by
      your many small submissions!
    </p>
    <p>
      Too tender, too yielding: so is your soil! But for a tree to become GREAT,
      it seeketh to twine hard roots around hard rocks!
    </p>
    <p>
      Also what ye omit weaveth at the web of all the human future; even your
      naught is a cobweb, and a spider that liveth on the blood of the future.
    </p>
    <p>
      And when ye take, then is it like stealing, ye small virtuous ones; but
      even among knaves HONOUR saith that “one shall only steal when one cannot
      rob.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It giveth itself”—that is also a doctrine of submission. But I say
      unto you, ye comfortable ones, that IT TAKETH TO ITSELF, and will ever
      take more and more from you!
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah, that ye would renounce all HALF-willing, and would decide for idleness
      as ye decide for action!
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah, that ye understood my word: “Do ever what ye will—but first be
      such as CAN WILL.
    </p>
    <p>
      Love ever your neighbour as yourselves—but first be such as LOVE
      THEMSELVES—
    </p>
    <p>
      —Such as love with great love, such as love with great contempt!”
       Thus speaketh Zarathustra the godless.—
    </p>
    <p>
      But why talk I, when no one hath MINE ears! It is still an hour too early
      for me here.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mine own forerunner am I among this people, mine own cockcrow in dark
      lanes.
    </p>
    <p>
      But THEIR hour cometh! And there cometh also mine! Hourly do they become
      smaller, poorer, unfruitfuller,—poor herbs! poor earth!
    </p>
    <p>
      And SOON shall they stand before me like dry grass and prairie, and
      verily, weary of themselves—and panting for FIRE, more than for
      water!
    </p>
    <p>
      O blessed hour of the lightning! O mystery before noontide!—Running
      fires will I one day make of them, and heralds with flaming tongues:—
    </p>
    <p>
      —Herald shall they one day with flaming tongues: It cometh, it is
      nigh, THE GREAT NOONTIDE!
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus spake Zarathustra.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0057" id="link2H_4_0057">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
