<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLVIII: Before Sunrise</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-48" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Before Sunrise</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>O heaven above me, thou pure, thou deep heaven! Thou abyss of light! Gazing on thee, I tremble with divine desires.</p>
				<p>Up to thy height to toss myself⁠—that is <em>my</em> depth! In thy purity to hide myself⁠—that is <em>mine</em> innocence!</p>
				<p>The God veileth his beauty: thus hidest thou thy stars. Thou speakest not: <em>thus</em> proclaimest thou thy wisdom unto me.</p>
				<p>Mute o’er the raging sea hast thou risen for me to-day; thy love and thy modesty make a revelation unto my raging soul.</p>
				<p>In that thou camest unto me beautiful, veiled in thy beauty, in that thou spakest unto me mutely, obvious in thy wisdom:</p>
				<p>Oh, how could I fail to divine all the modesty of thy soul! <em>Before</em> the sun didst thou come unto me⁠—the lonesomest one.</p>
				<p>We have been friends from the beginning: to us are grief, gruesomeness, and ground common; even the sun is common to us.</p>
				<p>We do not speak to each other, because we know too much⁠—: we keep silent to each other, we smile our knowledge to each other.</p>
				<p>Art thou not the light of my fire? Hast thou not the sister-soul of mine insight?</p>
				<p>Together did we learn everything; together did we learn to ascend beyond ourselves to ourselves, and to smile uncloudedly:⁠—</p>
				<p>—Uncloudedly to smile down out of luminous eyes and out of miles of distance, when under us constraint and purpose and guilt steam like rain.</p>
				<p>And wandered I alone, for <em>what</em> did my soul hunger by night and in labyrinthine paths? And climbed I mountains, <em>whom</em> did I ever seek, if not thee, upon mountains?</p>
				<p>And all my wandering and mountain-climbing: a necessity was it merely, and a makeshift of the unhandy one:⁠—to <em>fly</em> only, wanteth mine entire will, to fly into <em>thee</em>!</p>
				<p>And what have I hated more than passing clouds, and whatever tainteth thee? And mine own hatred have I even hated, because it tainted thee!</p>
				<p>The passing clouds I detest⁠—those stealthy cats of prey: they take from thee and me what is common to us⁠—the vast unbounded Yea- and Amen-saying.</p>
				<p>These mediators and mixers we detest⁠—the passing clouds: those half-and-half ones, that have neither learned to bless nor to curse from the heart.</p>
				<p>Rather will I sit in a tub under a closed heaven, rather will I sit in the abyss without heaven, than see thee, thou luminous heaven, tainted with passing clouds!</p>
				<p>And oft have I longed to pin them fast with the jagged gold-wires of lightning, that I might, like the thunder, beat the drum upon their kettle-bellies:⁠—</p>
				<p>—An angry drummer, because they rob me of thy Yea and Amen!⁠—thou heaven above me, thou pure, thou luminous heaven! Thou abyss of light!⁠—because they rob thee of <em>my</em> Yea and Amen.</p>
				<p>For rather will I have noise and thunders and tempest-blasts, than this discreet, doubting cat-repose; and also amongst men do I hate most of all the soft-treaders, and half-and-half ones, and the doubting, hesitating, passing clouds.</p>
				<p>And “he who cannot bless shall <em>learn</em> to curse!”⁠—this clear teaching dropt unto me from the clear heaven; this star standeth in my heaven even in dark nights.</p>
				<p>I, however, am a blesser and a Yea-sayer, if thou be but around me, thou pure, thou luminous heaven! Thou abyss of light!⁠—into all abysses do I then carry my beneficent Yea-saying.</p>
				<p>A blesser have I become and a Yea-sayer: and therefore strove I long and was a striver, that I might one day get my hands free for blessing.</p>
				<p>This, however, is my blessing: to stand above everything as its own heaven, its round roof, its azure bell and eternal security: and blessed is he who thus blesseth!</p>
				<p>For all things are baptized at the font of eternity, and beyond good and evil; good and evil themselves, however, are but fugitive shadows and damp afflictions and passing clouds.</p>
				<p>Verily, it is a blessing and not a blasphemy when I teach that “above all things there standeth the heaven of chance, the heaven of innocence, the heaven of hazard, the heaven of wantonness.”</p>
				<p>“Of Hazard”⁠—that is the oldest nobility in the world; that gave I back to all things; I emancipated them from bondage under purpose.</p>
				<p>This freedom and celestial serenity did I put like an azure bell above all things, when I taught that over them and through them, no “eternal Will”⁠—willeth.</p>
				<p>This wantonness and folly did I put in place of that Will, when I taught that “In everything there is one thing impossible⁠—rationality!”</p>
				<p>A <em>little</em> reason, to be sure, a germ of wisdom scattered from star to star⁠—this leaven is mixed in all things: for the sake of folly, wisdom is mixed in all things!</p>
				<p>A little wisdom is indeed possible; but this blessed security have I found in all things, that they prefer⁠—<em>to dance</em> on the feet of chance.</p>
				<p>O heaven above me! thou pure, thou lofty heaven! This is now thy purity unto me, that there is no eternal reason-spider and reason-cobweb:⁠—</p>
				<p>—That thou art to me a dancing-floor for divine chances, that thou art to me a table of the Gods, for divine dice and dice-players!⁠—</p>
				<p>But thou blushest? Have I spoken unspeakable things? Have I abused, when I meant to bless thee?</p>
				<p>Or is it the shame of being two of us that maketh thee blush!⁠—Dost thou bid me go and be silent, because now⁠—<em>day</em> cometh?</p>
				<p>The world is deep:⁠—and deeper than e’er the day could read. Not everything may be uttered in presence of day. But day cometh: so let us part!</p>
				<p>O heaven above me, thou modest one! thou glowing one! O thou, my happiness before sunrise! The day cometh: so let us part!⁠—</p>
				<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
