<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX: Child and Marriage</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Child and Marriage</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>I have a question for thee alone, my brother: like a sounding-lead, cast I this question into thy soul, that I may know its depth.</p>
				<p>Thou art young, and desirest child and marriage. But I ask thee: Art thou a man <em>entitled</em> to desire a child?</p>
				<p>Art thou the victorious one, the self-conqueror, the ruler of thy passions, the master of thy virtues? Thus do I ask thee.</p>
				<p>Or doth the animal speak in thy wish, and necessity? Or isolation? Or discord in thee?</p>
				<p>I would have thy victory and freedom long for a child. Living monuments shalt thou build to thy victory and emancipation.</p>
				<p>Beyond thyself shalt thou build. But first of all must thou be built thyself, rectangular in body and soul.</p>
				<p>Not only onward shalt thou propagate thyself, but upward! For that purpose may the garden of marriage help thee!</p>
				<p>A higher body shalt thou create, a first movement, a spontaneously rolling wheel⁠—a creating one shalt thou create.</p>
				<p>Marriage: so call I the will of the twain to create the one that is more than those who created it. The reverence for one another, as those exercising such a will, call I marriage.</p>
				<p>Let this be the significance and the truth of thy marriage. But that which the many-too-many call marriage, those superfluous ones⁠—ah, what shall I call it?</p>
				<p>Ah, the poverty of soul in the twain! Ah, the filth of soul in the twain! Ah, the pitiable self-complacency in the twain!</p>
				<p>Marriage they call it all; and they say their marriages are made in heaven.</p>
				<p>Well, I do not like it, that heaven of the superfluous! No, I do not like them, those animals tangled in the heavenly toils!</p>
				<p>Far from me also be the God who limpeth thither to bless what he hath not matched!</p>
				<p>Laugh not at such marriages! What child hath not had reason to weep over its parents?</p>
				<p>Worthy did this man seem, and ripe for the meaning of the earth: but when I saw his wife, the earth seemed to me a home for madcaps.</p>
				<p>Yea, I would that the earth shook with convulsions when a saint and a goose mate with one another.</p>
				<p>This one went forth in quest of truth as a hero, and at last got for himself a small decked-up lie: his marriage he calleth it.</p>
				<p>That one was reserved in intercourse and chose choicely. But one time he spoilt his company for all time: his marriage he calleth it.</p>
				<p>Another sought a handmaid with the virtues of an angel. But all at once he became the handmaid of a woman, and now would he need also to become an angel.</p>
				<p>Careful, have I found all buyers, and all of them have astute eyes. But even the astutest of them buyeth his wife in a sack.</p>
				<p>Many short follies⁠—that is called love by you. And your marriage putteth an end to many short follies, with one long stupidity.</p>
				<p>Your love to woman, and woman’s love to man⁠—ah, would that it were sympathy for suffering and veiled deities! But generally two animals alight on one another.</p>
				<p>But even your best love is only an enraptured simile and a painful ardour. It is a torch to light you to loftier paths.</p>
				<p>Beyond yourselves shall ye love some day! Then <em>learn</em> first of all to love. And on that account ye had to drink the bitter cup of your love.</p>
				<p>Bitterness is in the cup even of the best love: thus doth it cause longing for the Superman; thus doth it cause thirst in thee, the creating one!</p>
				<p>Thirst in the creating one, arrow and longing for the Superman: tell me, my brother, is this thy will to marriage?</p>
				<p>Holy call I such a will, and such a marriage.⁠—</p>
				<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
