<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      V. JOYS AND PASSIONS.
    </h2>
    <p>
      My brother, when thou hast a virtue, and it is thine own virtue, thou hast
      it in common with no one.
    </p>
    <p>
      To be sure, thou wouldst call it by name and caress it; thou wouldst pull
      its ears and amuse thyself with it.
    </p>
    <p>
      And lo! Then hast thou its name in common with the people, and hast become
      one of the people and the herd with thy virtue!
    </p>
    <p>
      Better for thee to say: “Ineffable is it, and nameless, that which is pain
      and sweetness to my soul, and also the hunger of my bowels.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Let thy virtue be too high for the familiarity of names, and if thou must
      speak of it, be not ashamed to stammer about it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus speak and stammer: “That is MY good, that do I love, thus doth it
      please me entirely, thus only do <i>I</i> desire the good.
    </p>
    <p>
      Not as the law of a God do I desire it, not as a human law or a human need
      do I desire it; it is not to be a guide-post for me to superearths and
      paradises.
    </p>
    <p>
      An earthly virtue is it which I love: little prudence is therein, and the
      least everyday wisdom.
    </p>
    <p>
      But that bird built its nest beside me: therefore, I love and cherish it—now
      sitteth it beside me on its golden eggs.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Thus shouldst thou stammer, and praise thy virtue.
    </p>
    <p>
      Once hadst thou passions and calledst them evil. But now hast thou only
      thy virtues: they grew out of thy passions.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thou implantedst thy highest aim into the heart of those passions: then
      became they thy virtues and joys.
    </p>
    <p>
      And though thou wert of the race of the hot-tempered, or of the
      voluptuous, or of the fanatical, or the vindictive;
    </p>
    <p>
      All thy passions in the end became virtues, and all thy devils angels.
    </p>
    <p>
      Once hadst thou wild dogs in thy cellar: but they changed at last into
      birds and charming songstresses.
    </p>
    <p>
      Out of thy poisons brewedst thou balsam for thyself; thy cow, affliction,
      milkedst thou—now drinketh thou the sweet milk of her udder.
    </p>
    <p>
      And nothing evil groweth in thee any longer, unless it be the evil that
      groweth out of the conflict of thy virtues.
    </p>
    <p>
      My brother, if thou be fortunate, then wilt thou have one virtue and no
      more: thus goest thou easier over the bridge.
    </p>
    <p>
      Illustrious is it to have many virtues, but a hard lot; and many a one
      hath gone into the wilderness and killed himself, because he was weary of
      being the battle and battlefield of virtues.
    </p>
    <p>
      My brother, are war and battle evil? Necessary, however, is the evil;
      necessary are the envy and the distrust and the back-biting among the
      virtues.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lo! how each of thy virtues is covetous of the highest place; it wanteth
      thy whole spirit to be ITS herald, it wanteth thy whole power, in wrath,
      hatred, and love.
    </p>
    <p>
      Jealous is every virtue of the others, and a dreadful thing is jealousy.
      Even virtues may succumb by jealousy.
    </p>
    <p>
      He whom the flame of jealousy encompasseth, turneth at last, like the
      scorpion, the poisoned sting against himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah! my brother, hast thou never seen a virtue backbite and stab itself?
    </p>
    <p>
      Man is something that hath to be surpassed: and therefore shalt thou love
      thy virtues,—for thou wilt succumb by them.—
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus spake Zarathustra.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0011" id="link2H_4_0011">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
