<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2>
      XXIII. THE CHILD WITH THE MIRROR.
    </h2>
    <p>
      After this Zarathustra returned again into the mountains to the solitude
      of his cave, and withdrew himself from men, waiting like a sower who hath
      scattered his seed. His soul, however, became impatient and full of
      longing for those whom he loved: because he had still much to give them.
      For this is hardest of all: to close the open hand out of love, and keep
      modest as a giver.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus passed with the lonesome one months and years; his wisdom meanwhile
      increased, and caused him pain by its abundance.
    </p>
    <p>
      One morning, however, he awoke ere the rosy dawn, and having meditated
      long on his couch, at last spake thus to his heart:
    </p>
    <p>
      Why did I startle in my dream, so that I awoke? Did not a child come to
      me, carrying a mirror?
    </p>
    <p>
      “O Zarathustra”—said the child unto me—“look at thyself in the
      mirror!”
     </p>
    <p>
      But when I looked into the mirror, I shrieked, and my heart throbbed: for
      not myself did I see therein, but a devil’s grimace and derision.
    </p>
    <p>
      Verily, all too well do I understand the dream’s portent and monition: my
      DOCTRINE is in danger; tares want to be called wheat!
    </p>
    <p>
      Mine enemies have grown powerful and have disfigured the likeness of my
      doctrine, so that my dearest ones have to blush for the gifts that I gave
      them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lost are my friends; the hour hath come for me to seek my lost ones!—
    </p>
    <p>
      With these words Zarathustra started up, not however like a person in
      anguish seeking relief, but rather like a seer and a singer whom the
      spirit inspireth. With amazement did his eagle and serpent gaze upon him:
      for a coming bliss overspread his countenance like the rosy dawn.
    </p>
    <p>
      What hath happened unto me, mine animals?—said Zarathustra. Am I not
      transformed? Hath not bliss come unto me like a whirlwind?
    </p>
    <p>
      Foolish is my happiness, and foolish things will it speak: it is still too
      young—so have patience with it!
    </p>
    <p>
      Wounded am I by my happiness: all sufferers shall be physicians unto me!
    </p>
    <p>
      To my friends can I again go down, and also to mine enemies! Zarathustra
      can again speak and bestow, and show his best love to his loved ones!
    </p>
    <p>
      My impatient love overfloweth in streams,—down towards sunrise and
      sunset. Out of silent mountains and storms of affliction, rusheth my soul
      into the valleys.
    </p>
    <p>
      Too long have I longed and looked into the distance. Too long hath
      solitude possessed me: thus have I unlearned to keep silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Utterance have I become altogether, and the brawling of a brook from high
      rocks: downward into the valleys will I hurl my speech.
    </p>
    <p>
      And let the stream of my love sweep into unfrequented channels! How should
      a stream not finally find its way to the sea!
    </p>
    <p>
      Forsooth, there is a lake in me, sequestered and self-sufficing; but the
      stream of my love beareth this along with it, down—to the sea!
    </p>
    <p>
      New paths do I tread, a new speech cometh unto me; tired have I become—
      like all creators—of the old tongues. No longer will my spirit walk
      on worn-out soles.
    </p>
    <p>
      Too slowly runneth all speaking for me:—into thy chariot, O storm,
      do I leap! And even thee will I whip with my spite!
    </p>
    <p>
      Like a cry and an huzza will I traverse wide seas, till I find the Happy
      Isles where my friends sojourn;—
    </p>
    <p>
      And mine enemies amongst them! How I now love every one unto whom I may
      but speak! Even mine enemies pertain to my bliss.
    </p>
    <p>
      And when I want to mount my wildest horse, then doth my spear always help
      me up best: it is my foot’s ever ready servant:—
    </p>
    <p>
      The spear which I hurl at mine enemies! How grateful am I to mine enemies
      that I may at last hurl it!
    </p>
    <p>
      Too great hath been the tension of my cloud: ‘twixt laughters of
      lightnings will I cast hail-showers into the depths.
    </p>
    <p>
      Violently will my breast then heave; violently will it blow its storm over
      the mountains: thus cometh its assuagement.
    </p>
    <p>
      Verily, like a storm cometh my happiness, and my freedom! But mine enemies
      shall think that THE EVIL ONE roareth over their heads.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yea, ye also, my friends, will be alarmed by my wild wisdom; and perhaps
      ye will flee therefrom, along with mine enemies.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah, that I knew how to lure you back with shepherds’ flutes! Ah, that my
      lioness wisdom would learn to roar softly! And much have we already
      learned with one another!
    </p>
    <p>
      My wild wisdom became pregnant on the lonesome mountains; on the rough
      stones did she bear the youngest of her young.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now runneth she foolishly in the arid wilderness, and seeketh and seeketh
      the soft sward—mine old, wild wisdom!
    </p>
    <p>
      On the soft sward of your hearts, my friends!—on your love, would
      she fain couch her dearest one!—
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus spake Zarathustra.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0030" id="link2H_4_0030">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
