<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Pitiful</h2>
			<p>My friends, there hath arisen a satire on your friend: “Behold Zarathustra! Walketh he not amongst us as if amongst animals?”</p>
			<p>But it is better said in this wise: “The discerning one walketh amongst men <em>as</em> amongst animals.”</p>
			<p>Man himself is to the discerning one: the animal with red cheeks.</p>
			<p>How hath that happened unto him? Is it not because he hath had to be ashamed too oft?</p>
			<p>O my friends! Thus speaketh the discerning one: shame, shame, shame⁠—that is the history of man!</p>
			<p>And on that account doth the noble one enjoin upon himself not to abash: bashfulness doth he enjoin on himself in presence of all sufferers.</p>
			<p>Verily, I like them not, the merciful ones, whose bliss is in their pity: too destitute are they of bashfulness.</p>
			<p>If I must be pitiful, I dislike to be called so; and if I be so, it is preferably at a distance.</p>
			<p>Preferably also do I shroud my head, and flee, before being recognised: and thus do I bid you do, my friends!</p>
			<p>May my destiny ever lead unafflicted ones like you across my path, and those with whom I <em>may</em> have hope and repast and honey in common!</p>
			<p>Verily, I have done this and that for the afflicted: but something better did I always seem to do when I had learned to enjoy myself better.</p>
			<p>Since humanity came into being, man hath enjoyed himself too little: that alone, my brethren, is our original sin!</p>
			<p>And when we learn better to enjoy ourselves, then do we unlearn best to give pain unto others, and to contrive pain.</p>
			<p>Therefore do I wash the hand that hath helped the sufferer; therefore do I wipe also my soul.</p>
			<p>For in seeing the sufferer suffering⁠—thereof was I ashamed on account of his shame; and in helping him, sorely did I wound his pride.</p>
			<p>Great obligations do not make grateful, but revengeful; and when a small kindness is not forgotten, it becometh a gnawing worm.</p>
			<p>“Be shy in accepting! Distinguish by accepting!”⁠—thus do I advise those who have naught to bestow.</p>
			<p>I, however, am a bestower: willingly do I bestow as friend to friends. Strangers, however, and the poor, may pluck for themselves the fruit from my tree: thus doth it cause less shame.</p>
			<p>Beggars, however, one should entirely do away with! Verily, it annoyeth one to give unto them, and it annoyeth one not to give unto them.</p>
			<p>And likewise sinners and bad consciences! Believe me, my friends: the sting of conscience teacheth one to sting.</p>
			<p>The worst things, however, are the petty thoughts. Verily, better to have done evilly than to have thought pettily!</p>
			<p>To be sure, ye say: “The delight in petty evils spareth one many a great evil deed.” But here one should not wish to be sparing.</p>
			<p>Like a boil is the evil deed: it itcheth and irritateth and breaketh forth⁠—it speaketh honourably.</p>
			<p>“Behold, I am disease,” saith the evil deed: that is its honourableness.</p>
			<p>But like infection is the petty thought: it creepeth and hideth, and wanteth to be nowhere⁠—until the whole body is decayed and withered by the petty infection.</p>
			<p>To him however, who is possessed of a devil, I would whisper this word in the ear: “Better for thee to rear up thy devil! Even for thee there is still a path to greatness!”⁠—</p>
			<p>Ah, my brethren! One knoweth a little too much about every one! And many a one becometh transparent to us, but still we can by no means penetrate him.</p>
			<p>It is difficult to live among men because silence is so difficult.</p>
			<p>And not to him who is offensive to us are we most unfair, but to him who doth not concern us at all.</p>
			<p>If, however, thou hast a suffering friend, then be a resting-place for his suffering; like a hard bed, however, a camp-bed: thus wilt thou serve him best.</p>
			<p>And if a friend doeth thee wrong, then say: “I forgive thee what thou hast done unto me; that thou hast done it unto <em>thyself</em>, however⁠—how could I forgive that!”</p>
			<p>Thus speaketh all great love: it surpasseth even forgiveness and pity.</p>
			<p>One should hold fast one’s heart; for when one letteth it go, how quickly doth one’s head run away!</p>
			<p>Ah, where in the world have there been greater follies than with the pitiful? And what in the world hath caused more suffering than the follies of the pitiful?</p>
			<p>Woe unto all loving ones who have not an elevation which is above their pity!</p>
			<p>Thus spake the devil unto me, once on a time: “Even God hath his hell: it is his love for man.”</p>
			<p>And lately, did I hear him say these words: “God is dead: of his pity for man hath God died.”⁠—</p>
			<p>So be ye warned against pity: <em>from thence</em> there yet cometh unto men a heavy cloud! Verily, I understand weather-signs!</p>
			<p>But attend also to this word: All great love is above all its pity: for it seeketh⁠—to create what is loved!</p>
			<p>“Myself do I offer unto my love, <em>and my neighbour as myself</em>”⁠—such is the language of all creators.</p>
			<p>All creators, however, are hard.⁠—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
