<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI: The Priests</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">The Priests</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>And one day Zarathustra made a sign to his disciples, and spake these words unto them:</p>
				<p>“Here are priests: but although they are mine enemies, pass them quietly and with sleeping swords!</p>
				<p>“Even among them there are heroes; many of them have suffered too much⁠—: so they want to make others suffer.</p>
				<p>“Bad enemies are they: nothing is more revengeful than their meekness. And readily doth he soil himself who toucheth them.</p>
				<p>“But my blood is related to theirs; and I want withal to see my blood honoured in theirs.”⁠—</p>
				<p>And when they had passed, a pain attacked Zarathustra; but not long had he struggled with the pain, when he began to speak thus:</p>
				<p>It moveth my heart for those priests. They also go against my taste; but that is the smallest matter unto me, since I am among men.</p>
				<p>But I suffer and have suffered with them: prisoners are they unto me, and stigmatised ones. He whom they call Saviour put them in fetters:⁠—</p>
				<p>In fetters of false values and fatuous words! Oh, that someone would save them from their Saviour!</p>
				<p>On an isle they once thought they had landed, when the sea tossed them about; but behold, it was a slumbering monster!</p>
				<p>False values and fatuous words: these are the worst monsters for mortals⁠—long slumbereth and waiteth the fate that is in them.</p>
				<p>But at last it cometh and awaketh and devoureth and engulfeth whatever hath built tabernacles upon it.</p>
				<p>Oh, just look at those tabernacles which those priests have built themselves! Churches, they call their sweet-smelling caves!</p>
				<p>Oh, that falsified light, that mustified air! Where the soul⁠—may not fly aloft to its height!</p>
				<p>But so enjoineth their belief: “On your knees, up the stair, ye sinners!”</p>
				<p>Verily, rather would I see a shameless one than the distorted eyes of their shame and devotion!</p>
				<p>Who created for themselves such caves and penitence-stairs? Was it not those who sought to conceal themselves, and were ashamed under the clear sky?</p>
				<p>And only when the clear sky looketh again through ruined roofs, and down upon grass and red poppies on ruined walls⁠—will I again turn my heart to the seats of this God.</p>
				<p>They called God that which opposed and afflicted them: and verily, there was much hero-spirit in their worship!</p>
				<p>And they knew not how to love their God otherwise than by nailing men to the cross!</p>
				<p>As corpses they thought to live; in black draped they their corpses; even in their talk do I still feel the evil flavour of charnel-houses.</p>
				<p>And he who liveth nigh unto them liveth nigh unto black pools, wherein the toad singeth his song with sweet gravity.</p>
				<p>Better songs would they have to sing, for me to believe in their Saviour: more like saved ones would his disciples have to appear unto me!</p>
				<p>Naked, would I like to see them: for beauty alone should preach penitence. But whom would that disguised affliction convince!</p>
				<p>Verily, their Saviours themselves came not from freedom and freedom’s seventh heaven! Verily, they themselves never trod the carpets of knowledge!</p>
				<p>Of defects did the spirit of those Saviours consist; but into every defect had they put their illusion, their stopgap, which they called God.</p>
				<p>In their pity was their spirit drowned; and when they swelled and o’erswelled with pity, there always floated to the surface a great folly.</p>
				<p>Eagerly and with shouts drove they their flock over their footbridge; as if there were but one footbridge to the future! Verily, those shepherds also were still of the flock!</p>
				<p>Small spirits and spacious souls had those shepherds: but, my brethren, what small domains have even the most spacious souls hitherto been!</p>
				<p>Characters of blood did they write on the way they went, and their folly taught that truth is proved by blood.</p>
				<p>But blood is the very worst witness to truth; blood tainteth the purest teaching, and turneth it into delusion and hatred of heart.</p>
				<p>And when a person goeth through fire for his teaching⁠—what doth that prove! It is more, verily, when out of one’s own burning cometh one’s own teaching!</p>
				<p>Sultry heart and cold head; where these meet, there ariseth the blusterer, the “Saviour.”</p>
				<p>Greater ones, verily, have there been, and higher-born ones, than those whom the people call Saviours, those rapturous blusterers!</p>
				<p>And by still greater ones than any of the Saviours must ye be saved, my brethren, if ye would find the way to freedom!</p>
				<p>Never yet hath there been a Superman. Naked have I seen both of them, the greatest man and the smallest man:⁠—</p>
				<p>All-too-similar are they still to each other. Verily, even the greatest found I⁠—all-too-human!⁠—</p>
				<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
