<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XL</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-40" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      XL. GREAT EVENTS.
    </h2>
    <p>
      There is an isle in the sea—not far from the Happy Isles of
      Zarathustra—on which a volcano ever smoketh; of which isle the
      people, and especially the old women amongst them, say that it is placed
      as a rock before the gate of the nether-world; but that through the
      volcano itself the narrow way leadeth downwards which conducteth to this
      gate.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now about the time that Zarathustra sojourned on the Happy Isles, it
      happened that a ship anchored at the isle on which standeth the smoking
      mountain, and the crew went ashore to shoot rabbits. About the noontide
      hour, however, when the captain and his men were together again, they saw
      suddenly a man coming towards them through the air, and a voice said
      distinctly: “It is time! It is the highest time!” But when the figure was
      nearest to them (it flew past quickly, however, like a shadow, in the
      direction of the volcano), then did they recognise with the greatest
      surprise that it was Zarathustra; for they had all seen him before except
      the captain himself, and they loved him as the people love: in such wise
      that love and awe were combined in equal degree.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Behold!” said the old helmsman, “there goeth Zarathustra to hell!”
     </p>
    <p>
      About the same time that these sailors landed on the fire-isle, there was
      a rumour that Zarathustra had disappeared; and when his friends were asked
      about it, they said that he had gone on board a ship by night, without
      saying whither he was going.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus there arose some uneasiness. After three days, however, there came
      the story of the ship’s crew in addition to this uneasiness—and then
      did all the people say that the devil had taken Zarathustra. His disciples
      laughed, sure enough, at this talk; and one of them said even: “Sooner
      would I believe that Zarathustra hath taken the devil.” But at the bottom
      of their hearts they were all full of anxiety and longing: so their joy
      was great when on the fifth day Zarathustra appeared amongst them.
    </p>
    <p>
      And this is the account of Zarathustra’s interview with the fire-dog:
    </p>
    <p>
      The earth, said he, hath a skin; and this skin hath diseases. One of these
      diseases, for example, is called “man.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And another of these diseases is called “the fire-dog”: concerning HIM men
      have greatly deceived themselves, and let themselves be deceived.
    </p>
    <p>
      To fathom this mystery did I go o’er the sea; and I have seen the truth
      naked, verily! barefooted up to the neck.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now do I know how it is concerning the fire-dog; and likewise concerning
      all the spouting and subversive devils, of which not only old women are
      afraid.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Up with thee, fire-dog, out of thy depth!” cried I, “and confess how deep
      that depth is! Whence cometh that which thou snortest up?
    </p>
    <p>
      Thou drinkest copiously at the sea: that doth thine embittered eloquence
      betray! In sooth, for a dog of the depth, thou takest thy nourishment too
      much from the surface!
    </p>
    <p>
      At the most, I regard thee as the ventriloquist of the earth: and ever,
      when I have heard subversive and spouting devils speak, I have found them
      like thee: embittered, mendacious, and shallow.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ye understand how to roar and obscure with ashes! Ye are the best
      braggarts, and have sufficiently learned the art of making dregs boil.
    </p>
    <p>
      Where ye are, there must always be dregs at hand, and much that is spongy,
      hollow, and compressed: it wanteth to have freedom.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Freedom’ ye all roar most eagerly: but I have unlearned the belief in
      ‘great events,’ when there is much roaring and smoke about them.
    </p>
    <p>
      And believe me, friend Hullabaloo! The greatest events—are not our
      noisiest, but our stillest hours.
    </p>
    <p>
      Not around the inventors of new noise, but around the inventors of new
      values, doth the world revolve; INAUDIBLY it revolveth.
    </p>
    <p>
      And just own to it! Little had ever taken place when thy noise and smoke
      passed away. What, if a city did become a mummy, and a statue lay in the
      mud!
    </p>
    <p>
      And this do I say also to the o’erthrowers of statues: It is certainly the
      greatest folly to throw salt into the sea, and statues into the mud.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the mud of your contempt lay the statue: but it is just its law, that
      out of contempt, its life and living beauty grow again!
    </p>
    <p>
      With diviner features doth it now arise, seducing by its suffering; and
      verily! it will yet thank you for o’erthrowing it, ye subverters!
    </p>
    <p>
      This counsel, however, do I counsel to kings and churches, and to all that
      is weak with age or virtue—let yourselves be o’erthrown! That ye may
      again come to life, and that virtue—may come to you!—”
     </p>
    <p>
      Thus spake I before the fire-dog: then did he interrupt me sullenly, and
      asked: “Church? What is that?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Church?” answered I, “that is a kind of state, and indeed the most
      mendacious. But remain quiet, thou dissembling dog! Thou surely knowest
      thine own species best!
    </p>
    <p>
      Like thyself the state is a dissembling dog; like thee doth it like to
      speak with smoke and roaring—to make believe, like thee, that it
      speaketh out of the heart of things.
    </p>
    <p>
      For it seeketh by all means to be the most important creature on earth,
      the state; and people think it so.”
     </p>
    <p>
      When I had said this, the fire-dog acted as if mad with envy. “What!”
       cried he, “the most important creature on earth? And people think it so?”
       And so much vapour and terrible voices came out of his throat, that I
      thought he would choke with vexation and envy.
    </p>
    <p>
      At last he became calmer and his panting subsided; as soon, however, as he
      was quiet, I said laughingly:
    </p>
    <p>
      “Thou art angry, fire-dog: so I am in the right about thee!
    </p>
    <p>
      And that I may also maintain the right, hear the story of another
      fire-dog; he speaketh actually out of the heart of the earth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Gold doth his breath exhale, and golden rain: so doth his heart desire.
      What are ashes and smoke and hot dregs to him!
    </p>
    <p>
      Laughter flitteth from him like a variegated cloud; adverse is he to thy
      gargling and spewing and grips in the bowels!
    </p>
    <p>
      The gold, however, and the laughter—these doth he take out of the
      heart of the earth: for, that thou mayst know it,—THE HEART OF THE
      EARTH IS OF GOLD.”
     </p>
    <p>
      When the fire-dog heard this, he could no longer endure to listen to me.
      Abashed did he draw in his tail, said “bow-wow!” in a cowed voice, and
      crept down into his cave.—
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus told Zarathustra. His disciples, however, hardly listened to him: so
      great was their eagerness to tell him about the sailors, the rabbits, and
      the flying man.
    </p>
    <p>
      “What am I to think of it!” said Zarathustra. “Am I indeed a ghost?
    </p>
    <p>
      But it may have been my shadow. Ye have surely heard something of the
      Wanderer and his Shadow?
    </p>
    <p>
      One thing, however, is certain: I must keep a tighter hold of it;
      otherwise it will spoil my reputation.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And once more Zarathustra shook his head and wondered. “What am I to think
      of it!” said he once more.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Why did the ghost cry: ‘It is time! It is the highest time!’
    </p>
    <p>
      For WHAT is it then—the highest time?”—
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus spake Zarathustra.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0047" id="link2H_4_0047">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
