<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XII. THE FLIES IN THE MARKET-PLACE.</h2>
			<p>Flee, my friend, into thy solitude! I see thee deafened with the noise of the great men, and stung all over with the stings of the little ones.</p>
			<p>Admirably do forest and rock know how to be silent with thee. Resemble again the tree which thou lovest, the broad-branched one—silently and attentively it o’erhangeth the sea.</p>
			<p>Where solitude endeth, there beginneth the market-place; and where the market-place beginneth, there beginneth also the noise of the great actors, and the buzzing of the poison-flies.</p>
			<p>In the world even the best things are worthless without those who represent them: those representers, the people call great men.</p>
			<p>Little do the people understand what is great—that is to say, the creating agency. But they have a taste for all representers and actors of great things.</p>
			<p>Around the devisers of new values revolveth the world:—invisibly it revolveth. But around the actors revolve the people and the glory: such is the course of things.</p>
			<p>Spirit, hath the actor, but little conscience of the spirit. He believeth always in that wherewith he maketh believe most strongly—in HIMSELF!</p>
			<p>Tomorrow he hath a new belief, and the day after, one still newer. Sharp perceptions hath he, like the people, and changeable humours.</p>
			<p>To upset—that meaneth with him to prove. To drive mad—that meaneth with him to convince. And blood is counted by him as the best of all arguments.</p>
			<p>A truth which only glideth into fine ears, he calleth falsehood and trumpery. Verily, he believeth only in Gods that make a great noise in the world!</p>
			<p>Full of clattering buffoons is the market-place,—and the people glory in their great men! These are for them the masters of the hour.</p>
			<p>But the hour presseth them; so they press thee. And also from thee they want Yea or Nay. Alas! thou wouldst set thy chair betwixt For and Against?</p>
			<p>On account of those absolute and impatient ones, be not jealous, thou lover of truth! Never yet did truth cling to the arm of an absolute one.</p>
			<p>On account of those abrupt ones, return into thy security: only in the market-place is one assailed by Yea? or Nay?</p>
			<p>Slow is the experience of all deep fountains: long have they to wait until they know WHAT hath fallen into their depths.</p>
			<p>Away from the market-place and from fame taketh place all that is great: away from the market-Place and from fame have ever dwelt the devisers of new values.</p>
			<p>Flee, my friend, into thy solitude: I see thee stung all over by the poisonous flies. Flee thither, where a rough, strong breeze bloweth!</p>
			<p>Flee into thy solitude! Thou hast lived too closely to the small and the pitiable. Flee from their invisible vengeance! Towards thee they have nothing but vengeance.</p>
			<p>Raise no longer an arm against them! Innumerable are they, and it is not thy lot to be a fly-flap.</p>
			<p>Innumerable are the small and pitiable ones; and of many a proud structure, rain-drops and weeds have been the ruin.</p>
			<p>Thou art not stone; but already hast thou become hollow by the numerous drops. Thou wilt yet break and burst by the numerous drops.</p>
			<p>Exhausted I see thee, by poisonous flies; bleeding I see thee, and torn at a hundred spots; and thy pride will not even upbraid.</p>
			<p>Blood they would have from thee in all innocence; blood their bloodless souls crave for—and they sting, therefore, in all innocence.</p>
			<p>But thou, profound one, thou sufferest too profoundly even from small wounds; and ere thou hadst recovered, the same poison-worm crawled over thy hand.</p>
			<p>Too proud art thou to kill these sweet-tooths. But take care lest it be thy fate to suffer all their poisonous injustice!</p>
			<p>They buzz around thee also with their praise: obtrusiveness, is their praise. They want to be close to thy skin and thy blood.</p>
			<p>They flatter thee, as one flattereth a God or devil; they whimper before thee, as before a God or devil. What doth it come to! Flatterers are they, and whimperers, and nothing more.</p>
			<p>Often, also, do they show themselves to thee as amiable ones. But that hath ever been the prudence of the cowardly. Yea! the cowardly are wise!</p>
			<p>They think much about thee with their circumscribed souls—thou art always suspected by them! Whatever is much thought about is at last thought suspicious.</p>
			<p>They punish thee for all thy virtues. They pardon thee in their inmost hearts only—for thine errors.</p>
			<p>Because thou art gentle and of upright character, thou sayest: “Blameless are they for their small existence.” But their circumscribed souls think: “Blamable is all great existence.”</p>
			<p>Even when thou art gentle towards them, they still feel themselves despised by thee; and they repay thy beneficence with secret maleficence.</p>
			<p>Thy silent pride is always counter to their taste; they rejoice if once thou be humble enough to be frivolous.</p>
			<p>What we recognise in a man, we also irritate in him. Therefore be on your guard against the small ones!</p>
			<p>In thy presence they feel themselves small, and their baseness gleameth and gloweth against thee in invisible vengeance.</p>
			<p>Sawest thou not how often they became dumb when thou approachedst them, and how their energy left them like the smoke of an extinguishing fire?</p>
			<p>Yea, my friend, the bad conscience art thou of thy neighbours; for they are unworthy of thee. Therefore they hate thee, and would fain suck thy blood.</p>
			<p>Thy neighbours will always be poisonous flies; what is great in thee—that itself must make them more poisonous, and always more fly-like.</p>
			<p>Flee, my friend, into thy solitude—and thither, where a rough strong breeze bloweth. It is not thy lot to be a fly-flap.—</p>
			<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
