<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LVI: Old and New Tables</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-56" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Old and New Tables</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<section id="chapter-56-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
					<p>Here do I sit and wait, old broken tables around me and also new half-written tables. When cometh mine hour?</p>
					<p>—The hour of my descent, of my down-going: for once more will I go unto men.</p>
					<p>For that hour do I now wait: for first must the signs come unto me that it is <em>mine</em> hour⁠—namely, the laughing lion with the flock of doves.</p>
					<p>Meanwhile do I talk to myself as one who hath time. No one telleth me anything new, so I tell myself mine own story.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
					<p>When I came unto men, then found I them resting on an old infatuation: all of them thought they had long known what was good and bad for men.</p>
					<p>An old wearisome business seemed to them all discourse about virtue; and he who wished to sleep well spake of “good” and “bad” ere retiring to rest.</p>
					<p>This somnolence did I disturb when I taught that <em>no one yet knoweth</em> what is good and bad:⁠—unless it be the creating one!</p>
					<p>—It is he, however, who createth man’s goal, and giveth to the earth its meaning and its future: he only <em>effecteth</em> it <em>that</em> aught is good or bad.</p>
					<p>And I bade them upset their old academic chairs, and wherever that old infatuation had sat; I bade them laugh at their great moralists, their saints, their poets, and their Saviours.</p>
					<p>At their gloomy sages did I bid them laugh, and whoever had sat admonishing as a black scarecrow on the tree of life.</p>
					<p>On their great grave-highway did I seat myself, and even beside the carrion and vultures⁠—and I laughed at all their bygone and its mellow decaying glory.</p>
					<p>Verily, like penitential preachers and fools did I cry wrath and shame on all their greatness and smallness. Oh, that their best is so very small! Oh, that their worst is so very small! Thus did I laugh.</p>
					<p>Thus did my wise longing, born in the mountains, cry and laugh in me; a wild wisdom, verily!⁠—my great pinion-rustling longing.</p>
					<p>And oft did it carry me off and up and away and in the midst of laughter; then flew I quivering like an arrow with sun-intoxicated rapture:</p>
					<p>—Out into distant futures, which no dream hath yet seen, into warmer souths than ever sculptor conceived⁠—where gods in their dancing are ashamed of all clothes:</p>
					<p>(That I may speak in parables and halt and stammer like the poets: and verily I am ashamed that I have still to be a poet!)</p>
					<p>Where all becoming seemed to me dancing of Gods, and wantoning of Gods, and the world unloosed and unbridled and fleeing back to itself:⁠—</p>
					<p>—As an eternal self-fleeing and re-seeking of one another of many Gods, as the blessed self-contradicting, recommuning, and refraternising with one another of many Gods:⁠—</p>
					<p>Where all time seemed to me a blessed mockery of moments, where necessity was freedom itself, which played happily with the goad of freedom:⁠—</p>
					<p>Where I also found again mine old devil and arch-enemy, the spirit of gravity, and all that it created: constraint, law, necessity and consequence and purpose and will and good and evil:⁠—</p>
					<p>For must there not be that which is danced <em>over</em>, danced beyond? Must there not, for the sake of the nimble, the nimblest⁠—be moles and clumsy dwarfs?⁠—</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
					<p>There was it also where I picked up from the path the word “Superman,” and that man is something that must be surpassed.</p>
					<p>—That man is a bridge and not a goal⁠—rejoicing over his noontides and evenings, as advances to new rosy dawns:</p>
					<p>—The Zarathustra word of the great noontide, and whatever else I have hung up over men like purple evening-afterglows.</p>
					<p>Verily, also new stars did I make them see, along with new nights; and over cloud and day and night, did I spread out laughter like a gay-coloured canopy.</p>
					<p>I taught them all <em>my</em> poetisation and aspiration: to compose and collect into unity what is fragment in man, and riddle and fearful chance;⁠—</p>
					<p>—As composer, riddle-reader, and redeemer of chance, did I teach them to create the future, and all that <em>hath been</em>⁠—to redeem by creating.</p>
					<p>The past of man to redeem, and every “It was” to transform, until the Will saith: “But so did I will it! So shall I will it⁠—”</p>
					<p>—This did I call redemption; this alone taught I them to call redemption.⁠⸺</p>
					<p>Now do I await <em>my</em> redemption⁠—that I may go unto them for the last time.</p>
					<p>For once more will I go unto men: <em>amongst</em> them will my sun set; in dying will I give them my choicest gift!</p>
					<p>From the sun did I learn this, when it goeth down, the exuberant one: gold doth it then pour into the sea, out of inexhaustible riches⁠—</p>
					<p>—So that the poorest fisherman roweth even with <em>golden</em> oars! For this did I once see, and did not tire of weeping in beholding it.⁠⸺</p>
					<p>Like the sun will also Zarathustra go down: now sitteth he here and waiteth, old broken tables around him, and also new tables⁠—half-written.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h4>
					<p>Behold, here is a new table; but where are my brethren who will carry it with me to the valley and into hearts of flesh?⁠—</p>
					<p>Thus demandeth my great love to the remotest ones: <em>be not considerate of thy neighbour!</em> Man is something that must be surpassed.</p>
					<p>There are many divers ways and modes of surpassing: see <em>thou</em> thereto! But only a buffoon thinketh: “man can also be <em>overleapt</em>.”</p>
					<p>Surpass thyself even in thy neighbour: and a right which thou canst seize upon, shalt thou not allow to be given thee!</p>
					<p>What thou doest can no one do to thee again. Lo, there is no requital.</p>
					<p>He who cannot command himself shall obey. And many a one <em>can</em> command himself, but still sorely lacketh self-obedience!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h4>
					<p>Thus wisheth the type of noble souls: they desire to have nothing <em>gratuitously</em>, least of all, life.</p>
					<p>He who is of the populace wisheth to live gratuitously; we others, however, to whom life hath given itself⁠—we are ever considering <em>what</em> we can best give <em>in return</em>!</p>
					<p>And verily, it is a noble dictum which saith: “What life promiseth <em>us</em>, that promise will <em>we</em> keep⁠—to life!”</p>
					<p>One should not wish to enjoy where one doth not contribute to the enjoyment. And one should not <em>wish</em> to enjoy!</p>
					<p>For enjoyment and innocence are the most bashful things. Neither like to be sought for. One should <em>have</em> them⁠—but one should rather <em>seek</em> for guilt and pain!⁠—</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h4>
					<p>O my brethren, he who is a firstling is ever sacrificed. Now, however, are we firstlings!</p>
					<p>We all bleed on secret sacrificial altars, we all burn and broil in honour of ancient idols.</p>
					<p>Our best is still young: this exciteth old palates. Our flesh is tender, our skin is only lambs’ skin:⁠—how could we not excite old idol-priests!</p>
					<p><em>In ourselves</em> dwelleth he still, the old idol-priest, who broileth our best for his banquet. Ah, my brethren, how could firstlings fail to be sacrifices!</p>
					<p>But so wisheth our type; and I love those who do not wish to preserve themselves, the down-going ones do I love with mine entire love: for they go beyond.⁠—</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-7" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h4>
					<p>To be true⁠—that <em>can</em> few be! And he who can, will not! Least of all, however, can the good be true.</p>
					<p>Oh, those good ones! <em>Good men never speak the truth.</em> For the spirit, thus to be good, is a malady.</p>
					<p>They yield, those good ones, they submit themselves; their heart repeateth, their soul obeyeth: <em>he</em>, however, who obeyeth, <em>doth not listen to himself</em>!</p>
					<p>All that is called evil by the good, must come together in order that one truth may be born. O my brethren, are ye also evil enough for <em>this</em> truth?</p>
					<p>The daring venture, the prolonged distrust, the cruel Nay, the tedium, the cutting-into-the-quick⁠—how seldom do <em>these</em> come together! Out of such seed, however⁠—is truth produced!</p>
					<p><em>Beside</em> the bad conscience hath hitherto grown all <em>knowledge</em>! Break up, break up, ye discerning ones, the old tables!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-8" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h4>
					<p>When the water hath planks, when gangways and railings o’erspan the stream, verily, he is not believed who then saith: “All is in flux.”</p>
					<p>But even the simpletons contradict him. “What?” say the simpletons, “all in flux? Planks and railings are still <em>over</em> the stream!</p>
					<p>“<em>Over</em> the stream all is stable, all the values of things, the bridges and bearings, all ‘good’ and ‘evil’: these are all <em>stable</em>!”⁠—</p>
					<p>Cometh, however, the hard winter, the stream-tamer, then learn even the wittiest distrust, and verily, not only the simpletons then say: “Should not everything⁠—<em>stand still</em>?”</p>
					<p>“Fundamentally standeth everything still”⁠—that is an appropriate winter doctrine, good cheer for an unproductive period, a great comfort for winter-sleepers and fireside-loungers.</p>
					<p>“Fundamentally standeth everything still”⁠—: but <em>contrary</em> thereto, preacheth the thawing wind!</p>
					<p>The thawing wind, a bullock, which is no ploughing bullock⁠—a furious bullock, a destroyer, which with angry horns breaketh the ice! The ice however⁠⸺<em>breaketh gangways</em>!</p>
					<p>O my brethren, is not everything <em>at present in flux</em>? Have not all railings and gangways fallen into the water? Who would still <em>hold on</em> to “good” and “evil”?</p>
					<p>“Woe to us! Hail to us! The thawing wind bloweth!”⁠—Thus preach, my brethren, through all the streets!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-9" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h4>
					<p>There is an old illusion⁠—it is called good and evil. Around soothsayers and astrologers hath hitherto revolved the orbit of this illusion.</p>
					<p>Once did one <em>believe</em> in soothsayers and astrologers; and <em>therefore</em> did one believe, “Everything is fate: thou shalt, for thou must!”</p>
					<p>Then again did one distrust all soothsayers and astrologers; and <em>therefore</em> did one believe, “Everything is freedom: thou canst, for thou willest!”</p>
					<p>O my brethren, concerning the stars and the future there hath hitherto been only illusion, and not knowledge; and <em>therefore</em> concerning good and evil there hath hitherto been only illusion and not knowledge!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-10" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h4>
					<p>“Thou shalt not rob! Thou shalt not slay!”⁠—such precepts were once called holy; before them did one bow the knee and the head, and take off one’s shoes.</p>
					<p>But I ask you: Where have there ever been better robbers and slayers in the world than such holy precepts?</p>
					<p>Is there not even in all life⁠—robbing and slaying? And for such precepts to be called holy, was not <em>truth</em> itself thereby⁠—slain?</p>
					<p>—Or was it a sermon of death that called holy what contradicted and dissuaded from life?⁠—O my brethren, break up, break up for me the old tables!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-11" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h4>
					<p>It is my sympathy with all the past that I see it is abandoned⁠—</p>
					<p>—Abandoned to the favour, the spirit and the madness of every generation that cometh, and reinterpreteth all that hath been as its bridge!</p>
					<p>A great potentate might arise, an artful prodigy, who with approval and disapproval could strain and constrain all the past, until it became for him a bridge, a harbinger, a herald, and a cock-crowing.</p>
					<p>This however is the other danger, and mine other sympathy:⁠—he who is of the populace, his thoughts go back to his grandfather⁠—with his grandfather, however, doth time cease.</p>
					<p>Thus is all the past abandoned: for it might some day happen for the populace to become master, and drown all time in shallow waters.</p>
					<p>Therefore, O my brethren, a <em>new nobility</em> is needed, which shall be the adversary of all populace and potentate rule, and shall inscribe anew the word “noble” on new tables.</p>
					<p>For many noble ones are needed, and many kinds of noble ones, <em>for a new nobility</em>! Or, as I once said in parable: “That is just divinity, that there are Gods, but no God!”</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-12" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h4>
					<p>O my brethren, I consecrate you and point you to a new nobility: ye shall become procreators and cultivators and sowers of the future;⁠—</p>
					<p>—Verily, not to a nobility which ye could purchase like traders with traders’ gold; for little worth is all that hath its price.</p>
					<p>Let it not be your honour henceforth whence ye come, but whither ye go! Your Will and your feet which seek to surpass you⁠—let these be your new honour!</p>
					<p>Verily, not that ye have served a prince⁠—of what account are princes now!⁠—nor that ye have become a bulwark to that which standeth, that it may stand more firmly.</p>
					<p>Not that your family have become courtly at courts, and that ye have learned⁠—gay-coloured, like the flamingo⁠—to stand long hours in shallow pools:</p>
					<p>(For <em>ability</em>-to-stand is a merit in courtiers; and all courtiers believe that unto blessedness after death pertaineth⁠—<em>permission</em>-to-sit!)</p>
					<p>Nor even that a Spirit called Holy, led your forefathers into promised lands, which I do not praise: for where the worst of all trees grew⁠—the cross⁠—in that land there is nothing to praise!⁠—</p>
					<p>—And verily, wherever this “Holy Spirit” led its knights, always in such campaigns did⁠—goats and geese, and wryheads and guyheads run <em>foremost</em>!⁠—</p>
					<p>O my brethren, not backward shall your nobility gaze, but <em>outward</em>! Exiles shall ye be from all fatherlands and forefather-lands!</p>
					<p>Your <em>children’s land</em> shall ye love: let this love be your new nobility⁠—the undiscovered in the remotest seas! For it do I bid your sails search and search!</p>
					<p>Unto your children shall ye <em>make amends</em> for being the children of your fathers: all the past shall ye <em>thus</em> redeem! This new table do I place over you!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-13" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h4>
					<p>“Why should one live? All is vain! To live⁠—that is to thrash straw; to live⁠—that is to burn oneself and yet not get warm.”⁠—</p>
					<p>Such ancient babbling still passeth for “wisdom”; because it is old, however, and smelleth mustily, <em>therefore</em> is it the more honoured. Even mould ennobleth.⁠—</p>
					<p>Children might thus speak: they <em>shun</em> the fire because it hath burnt them! There is much childishness in the old books of wisdom.</p>
					<p>And he who ever “thrasheth straw,” why should he be allowed to rail at thrashing! Such a fool one would have to muzzle!</p>
					<p>Such persons sit down to the table and bring nothing with them, not even good hunger:⁠—and then do they rail: “All is vain!”</p>
					<p>But to eat and drink well, my brethren, is verily no vain art! Break up, break up for me the tables of the never-joyous ones!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-14" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h4>
					<p>“To the clean are all things clean”⁠—thus say the people. I, however, say unto you: To the swine all things become swinish!</p>
					<p>Therefore preach the visionaries and bowed-heads (whose hearts are also bowed down): “The world itself is a filthy monster.”</p>
					<p>For these are all unclean spirits; especially those, however, who have no peace or rest, unless they see the world <em>from the backside</em>⁠—the backworldsmen!</p>
					<p><em>To those</em> do I say it to the face, although it sound unpleasantly: the world resembleth man, in that it hath a backside⁠—<em>so much</em> is true!</p>
					<p>There is in the world much filth: <em>so much</em> is true! But the world itself is not therefore a filthy monster!</p>
					<p>There is wisdom in the fact that much in the world smelleth badly: loathing itself createth wings, and fountain-divining powers!</p>
					<p>In the best there is still something to loathe; and the best is still something that must be surpassed!⁠—</p>
					<p>O my brethren, there is much wisdom in the fact that much filth is in the world!⁠—</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-15" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h4>
					<p>Such sayings did I hear pious backworldsmen speak to their consciences, and verily without wickedness or guile⁠—although there is nothing more guileful in the world, or more wicked.</p>
					<p>“Let the world be as it is! Raise not a finger against it!”</p>
					<p>“Let whoever will choke and stab and skin and scrape the people: raise not a finger against it! Thereby will they learn to renounce the world.”</p>
					<p>“And thine own reason⁠—this shalt thou thyself stifle and choke; for it is a reason of this world⁠—thereby wilt thou learn thyself to renounce the world.”⁠—</p>
					<p>—Shatter, shatter, O my brethren, those old tables of the pious! Tatter the maxims of the world-maligners!⁠—</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-16" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h4>
					<p>“He who learneth much unlearneth all violent cravings”⁠—that do people now whisper to one another in all the dark lanes.</p>
					<p>“Wisdom wearieth, nothing is worth while; thou shalt not crave!”⁠—this new table found I hanging even in the public markets.</p>
					<p>Break up for me, O my brethren, break up also that <em>new</em> table! The weary-o’-the-world put it up, and the preachers of death and the jailer: for lo, it is also a sermon for slavery:⁠—</p>
					<p>Because they learned badly and not the best, and everything too early and everything too fast; because they <em>ate</em> badly: from thence hath resulted their ruined stomach;⁠—</p>
					<p>—For a ruined stomach, is their spirit: <em>it</em> persuadeth to death! For verily, my brethren, the spirit <em>is</em> a stomach!</p>
					<p>Life is a well of delight, but to him in whom the ruined stomach speaketh, the father of affliction, all fountains are poisoned.</p>
					<p>To discern: that is <em>delight</em> to the lion-willed! But he who hath become weary, is himself merely “willed”; with him play all the waves.</p>
					<p>And such is always the nature of weak men: they lose themselves on their way. And at last asketh their weariness: “Why did we ever go on the way? All is indifferent!”</p>
					<p><em>To them</em> soundeth it pleasant to have preached in their ears: “Nothing is worth while! Ye shall not will!” That, however, is a sermon for slavery.</p>
					<p>O my brethren, a fresh blustering wind cometh Zarathustra unto all way-weary ones; many noses will he yet make sneeze!</p>
					<p>Even through walls bloweth my free breath, and in into prisons and imprisoned spirits!</p>
					<p>Willing emancipateth: for willing is creating: so do I teach. And <em>only</em> for creating shall ye learn!</p>
					<p>And also the learning shall ye <em>learn</em> only from me, the learning well!⁠—He who hath ears let him hear!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-17" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h4>
					<p>There standeth the boat⁠—thither goeth it over, perhaps into vast nothingness⁠—but who willeth to enter into this “Perhaps”?</p>
					<p>None of you want to enter into the death-boat! How should ye then be <em>world-weary</em> ones!</p>
					<p>World-weary ones! And have not even withdrawn from the earth! Eager did I ever find you for the earth, amorous still of your own earth-weariness!</p>
					<p>Not in vain doth your lip hang down:⁠—a small worldly wish still sitteth thereon! And in your eye⁠—floateth there not a cloudlet of unforgotten earthly bliss?</p>
					<p>There are on the earth many good inventions, some useful, some pleasant: for their sake is the earth to be loved.</p>
					<p>And many such good inventions are there, that they are like woman’s breasts: useful at the same time, and pleasant.</p>
					<p>Ye world-weary ones, however! Ye earth-idlers! You, shall one beat with stripes! With stripes shall one again make you sprightly limbs.</p>
					<p>For if ye be not invalids, or decrepit creatures, of whom the earth is weary, then are ye sly sloths, or dainty, sneaking pleasure-cats. And if ye will not again <em>run</em> gaily, then shall ye⁠—pass away!</p>
					<p>To the incurable shall one not seek to be a physician: thus teacheth Zarathustra:⁠—so shall ye pass away!</p>
					<p>But more <em>courage</em> is needed to make an end than to make a new verse: that do all physicians and poets know well.⁠—</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-18" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h4>
					<p>O my brethren, there are tables which weariness framed, and tables which slothfulness framed, corrupt slothfulness: although they speak similarly, they want to be heard differently.⁠—</p>
					<p>See this languishing one! Only a span-breadth is he from his goal; but from weariness hath he lain down obstinately in the dust, this brave one!</p>
					<p>From weariness yawneth he at the path, at the earth, at the goal, and at himself: not a step further will he go⁠—this brave one!</p>
					<p>Now gloweth the sun upon him, and the dogs lick at his sweat: but he lieth there in his obstinacy and preferreth to languish:⁠—</p>
					<p>—A span-breadth from his goal, to languish! Verily, ye will have to drag him into his heaven by the hair of his head⁠—this hero!</p>
					<p>Better still that ye let him lie where he hath lain down, that sleep may come unto him, the comforter, with cooling patter-rain.</p>
					<p>Let him lie, until of his own accord he awakeneth⁠—until of his own accord he repudiateth all weariness, and what weariness hath taught through him!</p>
					<p>Only, my brethren, see that ye scare the dogs away from him, the idle skulkers, and all the swarming vermin:⁠—</p>
					<p>—All the swarming vermin of the “cultured,” that⁠—feast on the sweat of every hero!⁠—</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-19" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h4>
					<p>I form circles around me and holy boundaries; ever fewer ascend with me ever higher mountains: I build a mountain-range out of ever holier mountains.⁠—</p>
					<p>But wherever ye would ascend with me, O my brethren, take care lest a <em>parasite</em> ascend with you!</p>
					<p>A parasite: that is a reptile, a creeping, cringing reptile, that trieth to fatten on your infirm and sore places.</p>
					<p>And <em>this</em> is its art: it divineth where ascending souls are weary, in your trouble and dejection, in your sensitive modesty, doth it build its loathsome nest.</p>
					<p>Where the strong are weak, where the noble are all-too-gentle⁠—there buildeth it its loathsome nest; the parasite liveth where the great have small sore-places.</p>
					<p>What is the highest of all species of being, and what is the lowest? The parasite is the lowest species; he, however, who is of the highest species feedeth most parasites.</p>
					<p>For the soul which hath the longest ladder, and can go deepest down: how could there fail to be most parasites upon it?⁠—</p>
					<p>—The most comprehensive soul, which can run and stray and rove furthest in itself; the most necessary soul, which out of joy flingeth itself into chance:⁠—</p>
					<p>—The soul in Being, which plungeth into Becoming; the possessing soul, which <em>seeketh</em> to attain desire and longing:⁠—</p>
					<p>—The soul fleeing from itself, which overtaketh itself in the widest circuit; the wisest soul, unto which folly speaketh most sweetly:⁠—</p>
					<p>—The soul most self-loving, in which all things have their current and counter-current, their ebb and their flow:⁠—oh, how could <em>the loftiest soul</em> fail to have the worst parasites?</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-20" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h4>
					<p>O my brethren, am I then cruel? But I say: What falleth, that shall one also push!</p>
					<p>Everything of to-day⁠—it falleth, it decayeth; who would preserve it! But I⁠—I wish also to push it!</p>
					<p>Know ye the delight which rolleth stones into precipitous depths?⁠—Those men of to-day, see just how they roll into my depths!</p>
					<p>A prelude am I to better players, O my brethren! An example! <em>Do</em> according to mine example!</p>
					<p>And him whom ye do not teach to fly, teach I pray you⁠—<em>to fall faster</em>!⁠—</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-21" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h4>
					<p>I love the brave: but it is not enough to be a swordsman⁠—one must also know <em>whereon</em> to use swordsmanship!</p>
					<p>And often is it greater bravery to keep quiet and pass by, that <em>thereby</em> one may reserve oneself for a worthier foe!</p>
					<p>Ye shall only have foes to be hated; but not foes to be despised: ye must be proud of your foes. Thus have I already taught.</p>
					<p>For the worthier foe, O my brethren, shall ye reserve yourselves: therefore must ye pass by many a one⁠—</p>
					<p>—Especially many of the rabble, who din your ears with noise about people and peoples.</p>
					<p>Keep your eye clear of their For and Against! There is there much right, much wrong: he who looketh on becometh wroth.</p>
					<p>Therein viewing, therein hewing⁠—they are the same thing: therefore depart into the forests and lay your sword to sleep!</p>
					<p>Go <em>your</em> ways! and let the people and peoples go theirs!⁠—gloomy ways, verily, on which not a single hope glinteth any more!</p>
					<p>Let there the trader rule, where all that still glittereth is⁠—traders’ gold. It is the time of kings no longer: that which now calleth itself the people is unworthy of kings.</p>
					<p>See how these peoples themselves now do just like the traders: they pick up the smallest advantage out of all kinds of rubbish!</p>
					<p>They lay lures for one another, they lure things out of one another⁠—that they call “good neighbourliness.” O blessed remote period when a people said to itself: “I will be⁠—<em>master</em> over peoples!”</p>
					<p>For, my brethren, the best shall rule, the best also <em>willeth</em> to rule! And where the teaching is different, there⁠—the best is <em>lacking</em>.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-22" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h4>
					<p>If <em>they</em> had⁠—bread for nothing, alas! for what would <em>they</em> cry! Their maintainment⁠—that is their true entertainment; and they shall have it hard!</p>
					<p>Beasts of prey, are they: in their “working”⁠—there is even plundering, in their “earning”⁠—there is even overreaching! Therefore shall they have it hard!</p>
					<p>Better beasts of prey shall they thus become, subtler, cleverer, <em>more man-like</em>: for man is the best beast of prey.</p>
					<p>All the animals hath man already robbed of their virtues: that is why of all animals it hath been hardest for man.</p>
					<p>Only the birds are still beyond him. And if man should yet learn to fly, alas! <em>to what height</em>⁠—would his rapacity fly!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-23" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h4>
					<p>Thus would I have man and woman: fit for war, the one; fit for maternity, the other; both, however, fit for dancing with head and legs.</p>
					<p>And lost be the day to us in which a measure hath not been danced. And false be every truth which hath not had laughter along with it!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-24" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h4>
					<p>Your marriage-arranging: see that it be not a bad <em>arranging</em>! Ye have arranged too hastily: so there <em>followeth</em> therefrom⁠—marriage-breaking!</p>
					<p>And better marriage-breaking than marriage-bending, marriage-lying!⁠—Thus spake a woman unto me: “Indeed, I broke the marriage, but first did the marriage break⁠—me!</p>
					<p>The badly paired found I ever the most revengeful: they make every one suffer for it that they no longer run singly.</p>
					<p>On that account want I the honest ones to say to one another: “We love each other: let us <em>see to it</em> that we maintain our love! Or shall our pledging be blundering?”</p>
					<p>—“Give us a set term and a small marriage, that we may see if we are fit for the great marriage! It is a great matter always to be twain.”</p>
					<p>Thus do I counsel all honest ones; and what would be my love to the Superman, and to all that is to come, if I should counsel and speak otherwise!</p>
					<p>Not only to propagate yourselves onwards but <em>upwards</em>⁠—thereto, O my brethren, may the garden of marriage help you!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-25" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h4>
					<p>He who hath grown wise concerning old origins, lo, he will at last seek after the fountains of the future and new origins.⁠—</p>
					<p>O my brethren, not long will it be until <em>new peoples</em> shall arise and new fountains shall rush down into new depths.</p>
					<p>For the earthquake⁠—it choketh up many wells, it causeth much languishing: but it bringeth also to light inner powers and secrets.</p>
					<p>The earthquake discloseth new fountains. In the earthquake of old peoples new fountains burst forth.</p>
					<p>And whoever calleth out: “Lo, here is a well for many thirsty ones, one heart for many longing ones, one will for many instruments”:⁠—around him collecteth a <em>people</em>, that is to say, many attempting ones.</p>
					<p>Who can command, who must obey⁠—<em>that is there attempted</em>! Ah, with what long seeking and solving and failing and learning and re-attempting!</p>
					<p>Human society: it is an attempt⁠—so I teach⁠—a long seeking: it seeketh however the ruler!⁠—</p>
					<p>—An attempt, my brethren! And <em>no</em> “contract”! Destroy, I pray you, destroy that word of the soft-hearted and half-and-half!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-26" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h4>
					<p>O my brethren! With whom lieth the greatest danger to the whole human future? Is it not with the good and just?⁠—</p>
					<p>—As those who say and feel in their hearts: “We already know what is good and just, we possess it also; woe to those who still seek thereafter!</p>
					<p>And whatever harm the wicked may do, the harm of the good is the harmfulest harm!</p>
					<p>And whatever harm the world-maligners may do, the harm of the good is the harmfulest harm!</p>
					<p>O my brethren, into the hearts of the good and just looked some one once on a time, who said: “They are the Pharisees.” But people did not understand him.</p>
					<p>The good and just themselves were not free to understand him; their spirit was imprisoned in their good conscience. The stupidity of the good is unfathomably wise.</p>
					<p>It is the truth, however, that the good <em>must</em> be Pharisees⁠—they have no choice!</p>
					<p>The good <em>must</em> crucify him who deviseth his own virtue! That <em>is</em> the truth!</p>
					<p>The second one, however, who discovered their country⁠—the country, heart and soil of the good and just⁠—it was he who asked: “Whom do they hate most?”</p>
					<p>The <em>creator</em>, hate they most, him who breaketh the tables and old values, the breaker⁠—him they call the law-breaker.</p>
					<p>For the good⁠—they <em>cannot</em> create; they are always the beginning of the end:⁠—</p>
					<p>—They crucify him who writeth new values on new tables, they sacrifice <em>unto themselves</em> the future⁠—they crucify the whole human future!</p>
					<p>The good⁠—they have always been the beginning of the end.⁠—</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-27" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h4>
					<p>O my brethren, have ye also understood this word? And what I once said of the “last man”?⁠⸺</p>
					<p>With whom lieth the greatest danger to the whole human future? Is it not with the good and just?</p>
					<p><em>Break up, break up, I pray you, the good and just!</em>⁠—O my brethren, have ye understood also this word?</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-28" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h4>
					<p>Ye flee from me? Ye are frightened? Ye tremble at this word?</p>
					<p>O my brethren, when I enjoined you to break up the good, and the tables of the good, then only did I embark man on his high seas.</p>
					<p>And now only cometh unto him the great terror, the great outlook, the great sickness, the great nausea, the great sea-sickness.</p>
					<p>False shores and false securities did the good teach you; in the lies of the good were ye born and bred. Everything hath been radically contorted and distorted by the good.</p>
					<p>But he who discovered the country of “man,” discovered also the country of “man’s future.” Now shall ye be sailors for me, brave, patient!</p>
					<p>Keep yourselves up betimes, my brethren, learn to keep yourselves up! The sea stormeth: many seek to raise themselves again by you.</p>
					<p>The sea stormeth: all is in the sea. Well! Cheer up! Ye old seaman-hearts!</p>
					<p>What of fatherland! <em>Thither</em> striveth our helm where our <em>children’s land</em> is! Thitherwards, stormier than the sea, stormeth our great longing!⁠—</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-29" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h4>
					<p>“Why so hard!”⁠—said to the diamond one day the charcoal; “are we then not near relatives?”⁠—</p>
					<p>Why so soft? O my brethren; thus do <em>I</em> ask you: are ye then not⁠—my brethren?</p>
					<p>Why so soft, so submissive and yielding? Why is there so much negation and abnegation in your hearts? Why is there so little fate in your looks?</p>
					<p>And if ye will not be fates and inexorable ones, how can ye one day⁠—conquer with me?</p>
					<p>And if your hardness will not glance and cut and chip to pieces, how can ye one day⁠—create with me?</p>
					<p>For the creators are hard. And blessedness must it seem to you to press your hand upon millenniums as upon wax⁠—</p>
					<p>—Blessedness to write upon the will of millenniums as upon brass⁠—harder than brass, nobler than brass. Entirely hard is only the noblest.</p>
					<p>This new table, O my brethren, put I up over you: <em>Become hard!</em>⁠—</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-56-30" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h4>
					<p>O thou, my Will! Thou change of every need, <em>my</em> needfulness! Preserve me from all small victories!</p>
					<p>Thou fatedness of my soul, which I call fate! Thou In-me! Over-me! Preserve and spare me for one great fate!</p>
					<p>And thy last greatness, my Will, spare it for thy last⁠—that thou mayest be inexorable <em>in</em> thy victory! Ah, who hath not succumbed to his victory!</p>
					<p>Ah, whose eye hath not bedimmed in this intoxicated twilight! Ah, whose foot hath not faltered and forgotten in victory⁠—how to stand!⁠—</p>
					<p>—That I may one day be ready and ripe in the great noontide: ready and ripe like the glowing ore, the lightning-bearing cloud, and the swelling milk-udder:⁠—</p>
					<p>—Ready for myself and for my most hidden Will: a bow eager for its arrow, an arrow eager for its star:⁠—</p>
					<p>—A star, ready and ripe in its noontide, glowing, pierced, blessed, by annihilating sun-arrows:⁠—</p>
					<p>—A sun itself, and an inexorable sun-will, ready for annihilation in victory!</p>
					<p>O Will, thou change of every need, <em>my</em> needfulness! Spare me for one great victory!⁠⸺</p>
					<p>Thus spake Zarathustra.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
